CHEMICAL  EFFECTS  OF
ELECTRIC  CURRENTCHEMICAL  EFFECTS  OF
ELECTRIC  CURRENT
Your elders might have cautioned
you against touching an electrical
appliance with wet hands. But
do you know why it is dangerous to
touch an electrical appliance with wet
hands?
We have lear nt earlier that the
materials, which allow electric current
to pass through them, are good
conductors of electricity. On the other
hand, materials, which do not allow
electric current to pass through them
easily, are poor conductors of electricity.
In Class VI, we made a tester  to test
whether a particular material allows the
electric current to pass through it or not.
Do you recall how the tester helped us
in deciding that?
We found that metals such as copper
and aluminium conduct electricity
wher eas materials such as rubber ,plastic and wood do not conduct
electricity. However , so far we have used
our tester to test materials which were
in solid state. But what about liquids?
Do liquids also conduct electricity? Let
us find out.
Paheli and Boojho want to
remind you that one
should not experiment
with the electric supply
from the mains or a
generator or an inverter .
Use only electric cells for
all the activities suggested
here.
Fig.11.1 :  A tester11.1 Do Liquids Conduct
Electricity?
To test whether a liquid allows electric
current to pass through it or not, we
can use the same tester (Fig .11.1).
Rationalised-2023-24
However , replace the cell by a battery.
Also, before using the tester we
should check whether it is working
or not.
Activity 11.1
Join the free ends of the tester
together for a moment. This
completes the circuit of the tester
and the bulb should glow.  However ,
if the bulb does not glow, it means
that the tester is not working. Can
you think of the possible reasons?
Is it possible that the connections
are loose? Or , the bulb is fused? Or ,
your cells are used up? Check that
all the connections are tight. If they
are, then replace the bulb with
another bulb. Now test if the tester
is working or not. If it is still not
working then replace the cells with
fresh cells.
Now that our tester is working, let
us use it to test the various liquids.
(Caution: While checking your tester ,
do not join its free ends for more than a
few seconds. Otherwise the cells of the
battery will drain very quickly.)
Activity 11.2
Collect a few small plastic or rubber
caps of discarded bottles and clean
them. Pour one teaspoon of lemon
juice or vinegar in one cap. Bring
your tester over this cap and let the
ends of the tester dip into lemon juice
or vinegar as shown in Fig. 11.2. Take
care that the ends are not more than
1 cm apart but at the same time do
not touch each other . Does the bulbFig. 11.2 :  Testing conduction of electricity in
lemon juice or vinegarof the tester glow? Does lemon juice
or vinegar conduct electricity? How
would you classify lemon juice or
vinegar — a good conductor or a poor
conductor?
When the liquid between the two
ends of the tester allows the electric
current to pass, the circuit of the tester
becomes complete. The current flows in
the circuit and the bulb glows. When
the liquid does not allow the electric
current to pass, the circuit of the tester
is not complete and the bulb does not
glow.
In some situations even though the
liquid is conducting, the bulb may not
glow . It may have happened in
Activity 11.2 . What can be the reason?
Do you remember why the bulb
glows when the electric current passes
through it? Due to the heating effect
of current, the filament of the bulb gets
heated to a high temperature and it
starts glowing. However , if the current
through a circuit is too weak, the
filament does not get heated
CHEMICAL  EFFECTS  OF ELECTRIC  CURRENT 139
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 140Activity 11.3
Take the tray from inside a discarded
matchbox. W rap an electric wir e a few
times around the tray. Place a small
compass needle inside it. Now
connect one free end of the wire to
the terminal of a battery. Leave the
other end free. Take another piece of
wire and connect it to the other
terminal of the battery (Fig. 11
.4).
Fig 11.4 :  Another testersufficiently and it does not glow. And
why is the current in the circuit weak?
Well, though a material may conduct
electricity, it may not conduct it as
easily as a metal. As a result, the
circuit of the tester may be complete
and yet the current through it may be
too weak to make the bulb glow. Can
we make another tester which can
detect a weak current?
We can use another ef fect of an electric
current to make another kind of tester .
Do you recall that electric current
produces a magnetic effect? What
happens to a compass needle kept nearby
when current flows in a wire? Even if
the current is small, the deflection of the
magnetic needle can be seen. Can we
make a tester using the magnetic
effect of currents? Let us find out  in
Activity 11.3 .
Join the free ends of two wires
momentarily. The compass needle
should show deflection
. Your tester
with two free ends of the wire is ready.
Now repeat Activity 11.2 using this
tester . Do you find a deflection in the
compass needle the moment you dip
the free ends of the tester in lemon
juice?
Take out the ends of the tester
from the lemon juice, dip them in
water and then wipe them dry.
Repeat the activity with other liquids
such as tap water , vegetable oil, milk,
honey. (Remember to wash and wipe
dry the ends of tester after testing
each liquid).  In each case observe
whether the magnetic needle shows
deflection or not. Record your
observations in Table 11.1.
You may use an LED (Fig. 11.3) in
place of the electric bulb in the tester
of Fig. 11.2. LED glows even when a
weak electric current flows through
it.
There are two wires (called leads)
attached to an LED. One lead is
slightly longer than the other .
Remember that while connecting to
a circuit, the longer lead is always
connected to the positive terminal of
the battery and the shorter lead is
connected to the negative terminal of
the battery.
Fig. 11.3 : LEDs
Rationalised-2023-24
CHEMICAL  EFFECTS  OF ELECTRIC  CURRENT 141
Table 11.1 : Good/Poor Conducting Liquids
S.No. Material Compass Needle Shows Good Conductor/
Deflection Y es/No Poor Conductor
1. Lemon juice Yes  Good Conductor
2. Vinegar
3. Tap W ater
4. Vegetable oil
5. Milk
6. Honey
7.
8.
9.
10.
When the free ends of the
tester do not touch each
other , ther e is an air gap
between them. Paheli knows
that air is a poor conductor of
electricity. But she has also read
that during lightning, an electric
current passes thr ough air . She
wonders if air is indeed a poor
conductor under all conditions.
This makes Boojho ask whether
other materials classified as
poor conductors also allow
electricity to pass under
certain conditions.
From Table 11.1, we find that some
liquids are good conductors of electricity
and some are poor conductors.
Actually, under certain conditions
most materials can conduct. That is why
it is preferable to classify materials as
good conductors and poor conductors
instead of classifying as conductors and
insulators.We have tested the conduction of
electricity thr ough tap water . Let us now
test the conduction of electricity through
distilled water .
Activity 11.4
Take about two teaspoonfuls of
distilled water in a clean and dry
plastic or rubber cap of a bottle. (You
may obtain distilled water from your
school science lab. Y ou may also get
distilled water from a medical store
or a doctor or a nurse) . Use the tester
to test whether distilled water
conducts electricity or not. What do
you find? Does distilled water
conduct electricity? Now dissolve a
pinch of common salt in distilled
water . Again test. What do you
conclude this time?
When salt is dissolved in distilled
water , we obtain salt solution. This is a
conductor of electricity.
The water that we get from sources
such as taps, hand pumps, wells and
ponds is not pure. It may contain
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 142several salts dissolved in it. Small
amounts of mineral salts are naturally
present in it. This water is thus a good
conductor of electricity. On the other
hand, distilled water is free of salts and
is a poor conductor.Most liquids that conduct electricity
are solutions of acids, bases and salts.
When an electric current flows
through a conducting solution, does it
produce an effect on the solution?
11.2 Chemical Effects of
Electric Current
In Class VII, we have learnt some effects
of electric current. Can you list these
effects? What effect does the current
produce when it flows through a
conducting solution? Let us find out.
Activity 11.6
Take out carbon rods carefully from
two discarded cells. Clean their
metal caps with sand paper . Wrap
copper  wires around the metal caps
of the carbon rods  and join them to
a battery (Fig. 1 1.5). W e call these
two rods electrodes . (Instead ofSmall amounts of mineral salts
present naturally in water are
beneficial for human health.
However , these salts make water
a good conductor . So, we should
never handle electrical
appliances with wet hands or
while standing on a wet floor .
We have found that common salt,
when dissolved in distilled water , makes
it a good conductor . What are the other
substances which, when dissolved in
distilled water , make it conducting? Let
us find out.
Caution: Do the next activity under the
supervision of your teacher/parent or
some elderly person, because the use of
acid is involved in it.
Activity 11.5
Take three clean plastic or rubber caps
of bottles. Pour about two teaspoonfuls
of distilled water in each of them. Add
a few drops of lemon juice or dilute
hydrochloric acid to distilled water in
one cap. Now in the second cap
containing distilled water , add a few
drops of a base such as caustic soda
or potassium iodide. Add a little sugar
to the distilled water in the third cap
and dissolve it. Test which solutions
conduct electricity and which do not.
What results do you obtain?
Fig.11.5 :  Passing current through water
Metal Cap
Carbon
rod
WaterCarbon
rod
Rationalised-2023-24
CHEMICAL  EFFECTS  OF ELECTRIC  CURRENT 143Boojho decided to test
whether some fruits and
vegetables also conduct
electricity or not. He cut
a potato into two halves and
inserted the copper wires of a tester
into it. Just then his mother called
him and he forgot to take out the
wires of the tester inserted into the
potato. When he came back after
half an hour , he noticed that ther e
was a greenish blue spot on the
potato around one wire whereas
there was no such spot around the
other wire (Fig. 11.6).carbon rods, you may take two iron
nails about 6 cm lon g.) Pour a
cupful of water in a glass/plastic
bowl. Add a teaspoonful of salt or a
few drops of lemon juice to water to
make it more conducting.  Now
immerse the electrodes in this
solution. Make sure that the metal
caps of the carbon rods are outside
the water . Wait for 3-4 minute s.
Observe the electrodes carefully. Do
you notice any gas bubbles near the
electrodes? Can we  call the change
taking place in the solution a
chemical change? Recall the
definition of a chemical change that
you learnt in Class VII.
In 1800, a British chemist, William
Nicholson (1753–1815), had shown
that if electrodes
were immersed
in water , and a
current was passed,
bubbles of oxygen
and hydrogen were
produced. Oxygen
bubbles formed
on the electrode
connected to the positive terminal of
the battery and hydrogen bubbles
formed on the other electrode.
The passage of an electric current
through a conducting solution causes
chemical reactions. As a result, bubbles
of a gas may be formed on the electrodes.
Deposits of metal may be seen on
electrodes. Changes of colour of
solutions may occur . The reaction would
depend on what solution and electrodes
are used. These are some of the chemical
effects of the electric current.
Fig. 11.6 :  Testing potato
He was surprised with this
observation and along with Paheli
repeated this activity many times. They
found that it was always the wire
connected to the positive terminal,
which had a greenish blue spot around
it. They felt that this discovery was very
useful because it could be used for
identifying the positive terminal of a
cell or a battery  concealed in a box.
They decided to report their finding to
a children’s magazine.
Remember that Boojho set out to
test whether potato conducted
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 144Allow the current to pass for
about 15 minutes. Now remove the
electrodes from the solution and
look at them carefully. Do you find
any difference in any one of them?
Do you find a coating over it? What
colour is the coating ? Note down 
the
terminal of the battery with which
this electrode is connected.electricity or not. What he found was
that current produced a chemical
effect in the potato. To him this was
very exciting. In fact, this is how
science sometimes works. Y ou ar e
looking for something and you
discover something else. Many
important discoveries have been
made in this manner .
11.3 Electroplating
You know  that a brand new bicycle has
shiny handlebar and wheel rims.
However , if these ar e accidentally
scratched, the shiny coating comes off
revealing a not so shiny sur face beneath.
You might have also seen women using
ornaments, which appear  to be made of
gold. However , with r epeated use, the
gold coating wears off, revealing silver or
some other metal beneath.
In both these cases, a metal has a
coating of another metal. Do you wonder
how a layer of one metal can be
deposited on top of another? W ell, let
us try doing it ourselves.
Activity 11.7
We will need copper sulphate and
two copper plates of size around
10 cm × 4 cm. T ake 250 mL of
distilled water in a clean and dry
beaker . Dissolve two teaspoonfuls of
copper sulphate in it. Add a few drops
of dilute sulphuric acid to copper
sulphate solution to make it more
conducting. Clean copper plates with
sand paper . Now rinse them with
water and dry them.  Connect the
copper plate s to the terminals of a
battery 
and immerse them in copper
sulphate solution (Fig. 11.7).When electric current is passed
through the copper sulphate solution,
copper sulphate dissociates into
copper and sulphate. The free copper
gets drawn to the electrode connected
to the negative terminal of the battery
and gets deposited on it.  But what
about the loss of copper from the
solution?
From the other electrode, a  copper
plate, an equal amount of copper gets
dissolved in the solution. Thus, the
After doing the electroplating
activity, Paheli interchanged
the electrodes and repeated
the activity. What do you think
she would observe this time?
Fig.1 1.7 : A simple circuit showing
electroplatingCopper plate
Copper sul-
phate
solutionCopper plate
Rationalised-2023-24
CHEMICAL  EFFECTS  OF ELECTRIC  CURRENT 145
loss of copper from the solution is
restored  and the process continues .
This means that copper gets
transferred from one electrode to the
other .
In the electroplating factories the
disposal of the used conducting
solution is a major concern. It is a
polluting waste and there are specific
disposal guidelines to protect the
environment.Fig. 11.8 :  Some electroplated objects
silver and gold on less expensive metals.
These ornaments have the appearance
of silver or gold but are much less
expensive.
Tin cans, used for storing food, ar e
made by electr oplating tin onto ir on. T in
is less reactive than iron. Thus, food
does not come into contact with iron and
is protected from getting spoilt.
Iron is used in bridges and
automobiles to provide strength.
However , iron tends to corr ode and rust.
So, a coating of zinc is deposited on iron
to protect it from corrosion and
formation of rust.
Boojho could get only one
copper plate. So he
performed Activity 11.7 by
connecting a carbon rod in
place of the copper plate
which was connected to
the negative terminal of
the battery. He succeeded
in obtaining a coating of
copper on carbon rod.
The process of depositing a layer of
any desired metal on another material
by means of electricity is called
electroplating . It is one of the most
common applications of chemical effects
of electric current.
Electroplating is a very useful
process. It is widely used in industry
for coating metal objects with a thin
layer of a different metal (Fig.11.8). The
layer of metal deposited has some
desired property, which the metal of the
object lacks. For example, chromium
plating is done on many objects such
as car parts, bath taps, kitchen gas
burners, bicycle handlebars, wheel rims
and many others.
Chromium has a shiny appearance.
It does not corrode. It resists scratches.
However , chromium is expensive and it
may not be economical to make the
whole object out of chromium. So the
object is made from a cheaper metal and
only a coating of chromium over it is
deposited. Jewellery makers electroplate
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 146
 KEYWORDS KEYWORDS KEYWORDS KEYWORDS KEYWORDS
ELECTRODE
ELECTROPLA TING
GOOD CONDUCTOR
LED
POOR CONDUCTOR WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT
ÜSome liquids are good conductors of electricity
and some are poor conductors.
ÜMost liquids that conduct electricity are
solutions of acids, bases and salts.
ÜThe passage of an electric current through a
conducting liquid causes chemical reactions.
The resulting effects are called chemical effects
of currents.
ÜThe process of depositing a layer of any desired
metal on another material, by means of
electricity, is called electroplating.
Exercises
1.Fill in the blanks.
(a)Most liquids that conduct electricity are solutions of                   ,
______________ and ______________.
(b)The passage of an electric current through a solution causes
______________ effects.
(c)If you pass current through copper sulphate solution, copper gets
deposited on the plate connected to the                      terminal of the
battery.
(d)The process of depositing a layer of any desired metal on another
material by means of electricity is called                          .
2.When the free ends of a tester are dipped into a solution, the magnetic
needle shows deflection. Can you explain the reason?
3.Name three liquids, which
when tested in the manner
shown in Fig.11.9, may
cause the magnetic needle
to deflect.
Fig. 11.9
Rationalised-2023-24
CHEMICAL  EFFECTS  OF ELECTRIC  CURRENT 1474.The bulb does not glow in the setup shown in Fig.11.10. List the possible
reasons. Explain your answer .
Fig. 11.10
5.A tester is used to check the conduction of electricity through two liquids,
labelled A and B. It is found that the bulb of the tester glows brightly for
liquid A while it glows very dimly for liquid B. Y ou would conclude that
(i)liquid A is a better conductor than liquid B.
(ii)liquid B is a better conductor than liquid A.
(iii) both liquids are equally conducting.
(iv) conducting pr operties of liquid cannot be compar ed in this manner .
6. Does pure water conduct electricity? If not, what can we do to make it
conducting?
7. In case of a fire, before the firemen use the water hoses, they shut off the
main electrical supply for the area. Explain why they do this.
8. A child staying in a coastal region tests the drinking water and also the
seawater with his tester . He finds that the compass needle deflects mor e
in the case of seawater. Can you explain the reason?
9. Is it safe for the electrician to carry out electrical repairs outdoors during
heavy downpour? Explain.
10. Paheli had heard that rainwater is as good as distilled water . So she
collected some rainwater in a clean glass tumbler and tested it using a
tester . To her surprise she found that the compass needle showed
deflection.  What could be the reasons?
11. Prepare a list of objects around you that are electroplated.
12. The pr ocess that you saw in Activity 11.7 is used for purification of copper .
A thin plate of pure copper and a thick rod of impure copper are used as
electrodes. Copper from impure rod is sought to be transfered to the thin
copper plate. Which electrode should be attached to the positive terminal
of the battery and why?E X E R C I S E S
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 148Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1.Test the conduction of electricity through various fruits and
vegetables. Display your result in a tabular form.
2.Repeat Activity 11.7 with a zinc plate in place of the copper plate
connected to the negative terminal of the battery. Now replace zinc
plate with some other metallic object and again repeat the activity.
Which metal gets deposited over which other metal? Discuss your
findings with your friends.
3.Find out if there is a commercial electroplating unit in your town.
What objects are electroplated there and for what purpose? (The
process of electroplating in a commercial unit is much more complex
than what we did in Activity 11.7). Find out how they dispose off the
chemicals they discard.
4.Imagine that you are an ‘entrepreneur’ and have been provided a
loan by a bank to set up a small electroplating unit. What object
would you like to electroplate and for what purpose? (Look up the
meaning of ‘entrepreneur’ in a dictionary).
5.Find out the health concerns associated with chromium
electroplating. How are people trying to resolve them?
6.You can make a fun pen for yourself. T ake a conducting metal plate
and spread a moist paste of potassium iodide and starch. Connect
the plate to a battery as shown in Fig. 11.11. Now using the free
end of the wire, write a few letters on the paste. What do you see?
Fig. 11.11
Rationalised-2023-24
CHEMICAL  EFFECTS  OF ELECTRIC  CURRENT 149Did Y ou Know?
LEDs (Light Emitting Diodes) are available in
many colours such as red, green, yellow, blue,
white and are increasingly being used for many
applications, for example in traffic signal lights.
LEDs are increasingly being used for lighting. A
cluster of white LEDs grouped together forms a
LED light source. LED light sources consume
less electricity and have longer lifetime  than
light bulbs and fluorescent tubes. Hence these
are gradually becoming the preferred lighting
source.
For more information on this topic visit:
lelectronics.howstuffworks.com/led.htm
Rationalised-2023-24
