SOME NATURAL  PHENOMENA SOME NATURAL  PHENOMENA
In this chapter we shall discuss two
destructive natural phenomena. These
are lightning and earthquakes. W e shall
also discuss what steps we can take to
minimise destruction caused by
these phenomena.
12.1Lightning
You might have seen sparks on a
electric pole when wires become loose.
This phenomenon is quite common
when wind is blowing and shaking the
wires. You might also have seen sparks
when a plug is loose in its socket.
Lightning is also an electric spark, but
on a huge scale.
In ancient times, people did not
understand the cause of these sparks.
They were, therefore, afraid of lightning
and thought that the wrath of gods was
visiting them. Now, of course, we
understand that lightning is caused by
the accumulation of charges in the
clouds. W e need not be afraid of
lightning, but we have to take
precautions to protect ourselves from
the deadly sparks.
The Sparks that the Greeks Knew
About
The ancient Greeks knew as early as
600 B.C. that when amber (amber is akind of r esin) was rubbed with fur , it
attracted light objects such as hair . You
might have seen that when you take
off woollen or polyester clothes, your
hair stands on end. If you take off these
clothes in the dark, you even see a
spark and hear a crackling sound. In
1752 Benjamin Franklin, an American
scientist, showed that lightning and the
spark  from your clothes are essentially
the same phenomena. However , it took
2000 years for this r ealisation to occur .
We shall now study some pr operties
of electric char ges. W e shall also see how
they are related to the lightning in the
sky.
Let us per form some activities to
understand the nature of electric
charges. But recall first what you might
have played as a game. When you rub
I wonder why they took so
many years to realise the
similarity.
Scientific discoveries are a
result of hardwork by many
people. It can sometimes take
a long time.
Rationalised-2023-24
a plastic scale on your dry hair , the
scale can attract very small pieces of
paper .
12.2 Charging by Rubbing
Activity 12.1
Take a used ballpen refill and rub
it vigorously with a piece of
polythene. Bring it close to small
pieces of paper . Take car e not to
touch the rubbed end of the refill
with your hand or with a metallic
object. Repeat the activity withsmall pieces of dry leaf, husk and
mustard seeds. Record your
observations.
When a plastic refill is rubbed with
polythene, it acquires a small electric
charge. Similarly, when a plastic comb
is rubbed with dry hair , it acquir es a
small charge. These objects are called
charged objects . In the process of
charging the refill and the plastic comb,
polythene and hair also get charged.
Let’s try to charge some other
objects  that are familiar to you.
Table 12.1
Objects Rubbed Materials Attracts/does not Charged/
Used for Rubbing Attract Pieces Not Charged
of Paper
Refill Polythene,
woollen cloth
Balloon Polythene, woollen
cloth, dry hair
Eraser Wool
Steel spoon Polythene,
woollen cloth
SOME NATURAL  PHENOMENA 151Activity 12.2
Collect the objects and the materials listed in Table 12.1. T ry to char ge each
by rubbing with the materials mentioned in the Table. Record your findings.
You can add mor e items to the T able.
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 15212.3 Types of Charges and
Their Interaction
We will select some objects fr om
Table 12.1 for the next activity.
Activity 12.3
(a) Inflate two balloons. Hang them
in such a way that they do not touch
each other (Fig. 15.1). Rub both the
balloons with a woollen cloth and
release them. What do you observe?Rub the other refill also with
polythene. Bring it close to the
charged refill. Be careful not to
touch the charged end with your
hand. Is there any effect on the refill
in the tumbler? Do the two attract
each other , or repel each other?
In this activity we have brought
close together the charged objects
that were made of the same
material. What happens if two
charged objects made of different
materials are brought close to each
other? Let’s find out.
(b) Rub a refill and place it gently in
a glass tumbler as before
(Fig. 12.3). Bring an inflated charged
balloon near the refill and observe.
Fig. 12.1 : Like charges repel each other
Fig. 12.2 : Interaction between like chargesNow let us repeat this activity
with the used pen refills. Rub one
refill with polythene. Place it
carefully in a glass tumbler using
the tumbler as a stand (Fig. 12.2).
Fig. 12.3 : Unlike charges attract each other
Let’s summarise the observations:
lA charged balloon repelled a charged
balloon.
lA charged refill repelled a charged
refill.
lBut a charged balloon attracted a
charged refill.
Does it indicate that the charge on
the balloon is of a different kind from
the charge on the refill? Can we say
then, that there are two kinds of                                 
Rationalised-2023-24
SOME NATURAL  PHENOMENA 153charges? Can we also say that the
charges of the same kind repel each
other , while char ges of dif ferent kind
attract each other?
It is a convention to call  the charge
acquired by a glass rod when it is
rubbed with silk as positive.  The
other kind of charge is said to be
negative.
It is observed that when a charged
glass rod is brought near a charged
plastic straw rubbed with polythene
there is attraction between the two.
What do you think would be the kind
of char ge on the plastic straw? Y our
guess, that the plastic straw would carry
a negative charge is correct.
The electrical charges generated by
rubbing are static. They do not move by
themselves. When charges move, they
constitute an electric current. Y ou have
been reading about electric current since
Class VI.  The current in a circuit which
makes a bulb glow, or the current that
makes a wire hot, is nothing but a
motion of charges.
12.4 Transfer of Char ge
Activity 12.4
Take an empty jam bottle. Take a
piece of cardboard slightly bigger in
size than the mouth of the bottle.
Pierce a hole in it so that a metal
paper clip can be inserted. Open out
the paper clip as shown in Fig. 12.4.
Cut two strips of aluminium foil
about 4 cm × 1 cm each. Hang them
on the paper clip as shown. Insert
the paper clip in the cardboard lid
so that it is perpendicular to it
(Fig. 12.4). Charge a refill and touch
Fig 12.4 : A simple electroscopeit with the end of the paper clip.
Observe what happens. Is there any
effect on the foil strips? Do they
repel each other or attract each
other? Now, touch other charged
bodies with the end of the paper clip.
Do foil strips behave in the same
way in all cases? Can this apparatus
be used to detect whether a body is
charged or not? Can you explain
why the foil strips repel each other?
The aluminium foil strips receive the
same charge from the charged refill
through the paper clip (remember that
metals are good conductors of
electricity). The strips carrying similar
charges repel each other and they
become wide open. Such a device can
be used to test whether an object is
carrying charge or not. This device is
known as electroscope .
Thus, we find that electrical charge
can be transferred from a charged object
to another thr ough a metal conductor .
Touch the end of the paper clip gently
with hand and you will find a change in
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 154the foil strips. They come back to their
original state. Repeat charging of foil
strips and touching the paper clip. Every
time you will find that the foil strips
collapse as soon as you touch the
paperclip  with hand . Why does it
happen? The reason is that the foil strips
lose charge to the earth through your
body. W e say that the foil strips ar e
discharged . The process of transfe rring
of charge from a charged object to the
earth is called earthing .
Earthing is provided in buildings to
protect us from electrical shocks due
to any leakage of electrical current.
12.5 The Story of Lightning
It is now possible to explain lightning
in terms of the charges produced by
rubbing.During the development of a
thunderstorm, the air currents move
upward while the water droplets move
downward. These vigorous movements
cause separation of charges. By a
process, not yet completely understood,
the positive charges collect near the
upper edges of the clouds and the
negative charges accumulate near the
lower edges. There is accumulation of
positive charges near the ground also.
When the magnitude of the
accumulated charges becomes very
large, the air which is normally a poor
conductor of electricity, is no longer able
to resist their flow. Negative and positive
charges meet, producing streaks of
bright light and sound. W e see str eaks
as lightning (Fig. 12.5). The process is
called an electric discharge.
Fig. 12.5 : Accumulation of charges leading to lightning.
Rationalised-2023-24
SOME NATURAL  PHENOMENA 155
The process of electric discharge can
occur between two or more clouds, or
between clouds and the earth. Today we
need not get frightened by lightning like
our ancestors did. Now we understand
the basic phenomenon. Scientists are
trying hard to improve this
understanding. However , lightning
strike could destroy life and property. It
is, therefore, necessary to take measures
to protect ourselves.
12.6 Lightning Safety
During lightning and thunderstorm no
open place is safe.
lHearing thunder is an alert to rush
to a safer place.
lAfter hearing the last thunder , wait
for some time before coming out of
the safe place.
Finding a Safe Place
A house or a building is a safe place.
If you are travelling by car or by bus,
you are safe inside with windows and
doors of the vehicle shut.
Do’s and Don’ts during a
Thunderstorm
Outside
Open vehicles, like motorbikes, tractors,
construction machinery, open cars are
not safe. Open fields, tall trees, shelters
in parks, elevated places do not protect
us from lightning strokes.
Carrying an umbrella is not at all a
good idea during thunderstorms.
If in a forest, take shelter under
shorter trees.
If no shelter is available and you are
in an open field, stay far away from all
trees. Stay away from poles or othermetal objects. Do not lie on the ground.
Instead, squat low on the ground. Place
your hands on your knees with your
head between the hands (Fig. 12.6). This
position will make you the smallest
target to be struck.
Inside the house
Lightning can strike telephone cords,
electrical wires and metal pipes (Do you
remember , lightning is an electrical
discharge?). During a thunderstorm
contact with these should be avoided. It
is safer to use mobile phones and
cordless phones. However , it is not wise
to call up a person who is receiving your
phone through a wired phone.
Bathing should be avoided during
thunderstorms to avoid contact with
running water .
Electrical appliances like computer s,
TVs,
 etc., should be unplugged. Electrical
lights can remain on . They  do not cause
any harm.Fig. 12.6 : Safe position during lightning
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 156Lightning Conductors
Lightning Conductor is a device used
to protect buildings from the effect of
lightning. A metallic rod, taller than the
building, is installed in the walls of the
building during its construction. One
end of the rod is kept out in the air and
the other is buried deep in the ground
(Fig. 12.7). The rod provides easy route
for the transfer of electric charge to the
ground.
The metal columns used during
construction, electrical wires and water
pipes in the buildings also protect us to
an extent. But do not touch them during
a thunderstorm.12.7 Earthquakes
You just lear nt about thunderstor m and
lightning. These natural phenomena can
cause large scale destruction of human
life and property. Fortunately, these
phenomena can be predicted to some
extent.  The weather department can
warn about a thunderstorm developing
in some area.
If a thunderstorm occurs there is
always a possibility of lightning and
cyclones accompanying it.  So, we get
time to take measures to protect
ourselves from the damage caused by
these phenomena.
Fig. 12.7 :  Lightning conductorlightning
conductor
copper
plate
Rationalised-2023-24
SOME NATURAL  PHENOMENA 157Ther e is, however , one natural
phenomenon which we are not yet able
to predict accurately.  It is an
earthquake.  It can cause damage to
human life and property on a huge scale.
A major earthquake occurred in
India on 8 October 2005 in Uri and
Tangdhar towns of North Kashmir
(Fig. 12.8). Before that a major
earthquake occurred on 26 January
2001 in Bhuj district of Gujarat.
Activity 12.5
Ask your parents about the huge
damage to life and property caused
by these earthquakes.  Collect a few
pictures showing the damagecaused by these earthquakes from
newspapers and magazines of those
days.  Prepare a short report on the
suffering of the people during and
after the earthquakes.
What is an earthquake? What
happens when it occurs?  What can we
do to minimise its effects?  These are
some of the questions which we shall
discuss below.
What is an Earthquake?
An earthquake is a sudden shaking or
trembling of the earth which lasts for a
very short time. It is caused by a
disturbance deep inside the earth’s
Fig. 12.8 : Kashmir earthquake
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 158My grandmother told me
that the earth is balanced
on the horn of a bull and
when the bull shifts it to
the other horn, an
earthquake takes place.
How could it be true?
crust.  Earthquakes occur all the time,
all over the earth.  They are not even
noticed.  Major earthquakes are much
less frequent.  They can cause immense
damage to buildings, bridges, dams and
people.  There can be a great loss to life
and property.  Earthquakes can cause
floods, landslides and tsunamis.  A
major tsunami occurred in the Indian
Ocean on 26 December 2004.  All the
coastal areas around the ocean suffered
huge losses.
Activity 12.6
Take an outline map of the world.
Locate the eastern coast and
Andaman and Nicobar Islands in
India.  Mark other countries around
the Indian Ocean which could have
suffered damage.  Collect accounts
of the devastation caused by the
tsunami in India from your parents,
or other elders in the family or in
the neighbourhood.
What Causes an Earthquake?
Fig. 12.10 : Earth platesWhat could cause a
disturbance inside
the earth?
Fig. 12.9 : Structure of the earthNow we know that the tremors are
caused by the disturbance deep down
inside the uppermost layer of the earth
called the crust  (Fig. 12.9).
In ancient times, people did not know
the true cause of earthquakes.  Their
ideas were, therefore, expressed in
mythical stories such as the one told by
Boojho’s grandmother . Similar myths
were prevalent in other parts of
the world.The outermost layer of the earth is
not in one piece.  It is fragmented.  Each
fragment is called a plate  (Fig. 12.10).
These plates are in continual motion.
When they brush past one another ,
Arabian
PlateEurasian
Plate
Indan
Plate
crust
mantle
outer
core
inner
core
Rationalised-2023-24
SOME NATURAL  PHENOMENA 159or a plate goes under another due to
collision (Fig. 12.11), they cause
disturbance in the earth’s crust.  It is
this disturbance that shows up as an
earthquake on the sur face of the earth.carried out.  However , most earthquakes
are caused by the movement of earth’s
plates.
Since earthquakes are caused by the
movement of plates, the boundaries of
the plates are the weak zones where
earthquakes are mor e likely to occur .
The weak zones are also known as
seismic  or fault zones .  In India, the
areas most thr eatened ar e Kashmir ,
Wester n and Central Himalayas, the
whole of North-East, Rann of Kutch,
Rajasthan and the Indo–Gangetic Plane.
Some areas of South India also fall in
the danger zone  (Fig. 12.12).
If scientists know so much
about earthquakes, can
they also predict when and
where the next one will
strike?
I read somewhere that
underground explosions
could also cause
tremors.
Fig. 12.11 : Movements of earth’s plates
Fig. 12.12 : Movements of Indian earth’s plate
The power of an earthquake is
expressed in terms of a magnitude
on a scale called the Richter scale .
Really destructive earthquakes have
magnitudes higher than 7 on the
Richter scale.  Both Bhuj and Kashmir
earthquakes had magnitudes greater
than 7.5.Although, we know for sure what
causes an earthquake, it is not yet
possible to predict when and where the
next earthquake might occur .
Tremors on the earth can also be
caused when a volcano erupts, or a
meteor hits the earth, or an
underground nuclear explosion is
Colliding
Brushing
past
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 160The tremors produce waves on the surface of the earth. These are called
seismic waves. The waves are recorded by an instrument called the
seismograph (Fig. 12.13). The instrument is simply a vibrating rod, or a
pendulum, which starts vibrating when tr emors occur . A pen is attached to
the vibrating system. The pen records the seismic waves on a paper which
moves under it. By studying these waves, scientists can construct a complete
map of the earthquake, as shown in  Fig. 12.14. They can also estimate its
power to cause destruction.
Fig. 12.13 : A seismographA typical seismograph record
Fig. 12.14 : Map of the earthquake
EpicentreSeismic
wavesFocus
Inside the earthEarth’s
Surface
Like many other scales in science (decibel is another example), Richter scale
is not linear .  This means that an earthquake of magnitude 6 does not have
one and half times the destructive energy of an earthquake of magnitude 4.
In fact, an increase of 2 in magnitude means 1000 times more destructive
energy. Therefore, an earthquake of magnitude 6 has thousand times more
destructive energy than an earthquake of magnitude 4.
Protection against Earthquakes
We know fr om the earlier pages that
earthquakes cannot be pr edicted.  W e
have also seen that they can be highly
destructive.  It is, therefore, important
that we take necessary precautions to
protect ourselves all the time.  Peopleliving in seismic zones, where the
earthquakes are mor e likely to occur ,
have to be specially prepared.  First of
all, the buildings in these zones should
be so designed that they can withstand
major tremors. Modern building
technology can make it possible.
String
PenPendulum Bob
Rotating
Drum
Chart
PaperSupport
Rationalised-2023-24
SOME NATURAL  PHENOMENA 161It is advisable to make the structure
simple so that it is ‘Quake Safe’.
lConsult qualified architects and
structural engineers.
lIn highly seismic areas, the use of
mud or timber is better than using
heavy construction material. Keep
roofs as light as possible.  In case
the structure falls, the damage will
not be heavy.
lIt is better if the cupboards and
shelves are fixed to the walls, so that
they do not fall easily.
lBe careful where you hang wall
clocks, photo-frames, water heaters
etc., so that in the event of an
earthquake, they do not fall on
people.
lSince some buildings may catch fire
due to an earthquake, it is necessary
that all buildings, especially tall
buildings, have fire fighting
equipment in working or der.The Central Building Research
Institute, Roorkee, has developed
knowhow to make quake-resistant
houses.
In the event that an earthquake does
strike, take the following steps to protect
yourself.
1. If you are at home
lTake shelter under a table and stay
there till the shaking stops.
lStay away from tall and heavy objects
that may fall on you.
lIf you are in bed, do not get up.
Protect your head with a pillow.
2. If you are outdoors
lFind a clear spot, away from
buildings, trees and overhead power
lines.  Drop to the ground.
lIf you are in a car or a bus, do not
come out.  Ask the driver to drive
slowly to a clear spot.  Do not come
out till the tremors stop.
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 162
 KEYWORDS KEYWORDS KEYWORDS KEYWORDS KEYWORDS
CRUST
DISCHARGE
EARTH’S PLA TES
EARTHQUAKE
ELECTROSCOPE
LIGHTNING
LIGHTNING
CONDUCTOR
NEGA TIVE CHARGE
POSITIVE CHARGE
RICHTER SCALE
SEISMOGRAPH
THUNDER
THUNDERSTORM
TRANSFER OF
CHARGE
TSUNAMI
TREMOR WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT
ÜSome objects can be charged by rubbing with
other objects.
ÜThere are two kinds of charges — positive
charge and negative charge
ÜLike charges repel and unlike charges attract
each other .
ÜThe electrical charges produced by rubbing
are called static charges.
ÜWhen charges move, they constitute an
electric current.
ÜAn electroscope may be used to detect
whether a body is charged or not.
ÜThe process of transfer of charge from a
charged object to the earth is called earthing.
ÜThe process of electric discharge between
clouds and the earth or between different
clouds causes lightning.
ÜLightning strike could destroy life and
property.
ÜLightning conductors can protect buildings
from the effects of lightning.
ÜAn earthquake is a sudden shaking or
trembling of the earth.
ÜEarthquake is caused by a disturbance deep
inside the earth’s crust.
ÜIt is not possible to predict the occurrence of
an earthquake.
ÜEarthquakes tend to occur at the boundaries
of earth’s plates. These boundaries are known
as fault zones.
ÜDestructive energy of an earthquake is
measured on the Richter scale. The
earthquake measuring 7 or more on Richter
scale can cause severe damage to life and
property.
ÜWe should take necessary pr ecautions to
protect ourselves from earthquakes.
Rationalised-2023-24
SOME NATURAL  PHENOMENA 163Exercises
Select the correct option in Questions 1 and 2.
1. Which of the following cannot be charged easily by friction?
(a)A plastic scale
(b)A copper rod
(c)An inflated balloon
(d)A woollen cloth.
2. When a glass rod is rubbed with a piece of silk cloth the rod
(a)and the cloth both acquire positive charge.
(b)becomes positively charged while the cloth has a negative charge.
(c)and the cloth both acquire negative charge.
(d)becomes negatively charged while the cloth has a positive charge.
3. Write T against true and F against false in the following statements.
(a)Like charges attract each other (T/F)
(b)A charged glass rod attract a charged plastic straw (T/F)
(c)Lightning conductor cannot protect a building from lightning (T/F)
(d)Earthquakes can be predicted in advance (T/F)
4. Sometimes, a crackling sound is heard while taking off a sweater during
winters. Explain.
5. Explain why a charged body loses its charge if we touch it with our hand.
6. Name the scale on which the destructive energy of an earthquake is
measur ed. An earthquake measur es 3 on this scale. W ould it be recor ded
by a seismograph? Is it likely to cause much damage?
7. Suggest three measures to protect ourselves from lightning.
8. Explain why a charged balloon is repelled by another charged balloon
whereas an uncharged balloon is attracted by another charged balloon?
9. Describe with the help of a diagram an instrument which can be used to
detect a charged body.
10. List three states in India where earthquakes are more likely to strike.
11. Suppose you are outside your home and an earthquake strikes. What
precaution would you take to protect yourself?
12. The weather department has predicted that a thunderstorm is likely to
occur on a certain day. Suppose you have to go out on that day. W ould you
carry an umbrella? Explain.
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 164Extended Lear ning — Activities and Pr ojects
1.Open a water tap. Adjust the flow so that it forms a thin stream.
Charge a refill. Bring it near the water stream. Observe what
happens. W rite a short r eport on the activity.
2.Make your own char ge detector . Take a paper strip r oughly 10 cm ×
3 cm.  Give it a shape as shown in Fig. 12.15. Balance it on a
needle. Bring a charged body near it. Observe what happens. W rite
a brief report, explaining its working.
3.This activity should be performed at night. Go to a room  where there
is a fluorescent tube light. Charge a balloon. Switch off the tube light
so that the room is completely dark. Bring the charged balloon near
the tubelight. Y ou should see a faint glow. Move the balloon along
the length of the tube and observe how the glow changes.
Caution : Do not touch the metal parts of the tube or the wires
connecting the tube with the mains.
4.Find out if there is an organisation in your area which provides
relief to those suf fering from natural disaster . Enquir e about the
type of help they render to the victims of earthquakes. Prepare a
brief report on the problems of the earthquake victims.
For more information on these topics, visit:
lscience.howstuffworks.com/lightning.htm
lscience.howstuffworks.com/earthquake.htmFig. 12.15
Paper 10 cm × 3 cm
Fold along the dotted line
Cut along the dotted line
Needle
ThermoCole
Rationalised-2023-24
