CROP PRODUCTION  AND MANAGEMENT CROP PRODUCTION  AND MANAGEMENT
Paheli and Boojho went to their
uncle’s house during the summer
vacation. Their uncle is a far mer.
One day they saw some tools like khurpi ,
sickle, shovel, plough, etc., in the field.
In order to provide food for a large
population— regular production, proper
management and distribution is
necessary.
1.1Agricultural Practices
Till 10,000 B.C.E. people wer e
nomadic. They were wandering in
groups from place to place in search
of food and shelter . They ate raw
fruits and vegetables and started
hunting animals for food. Later , they
could cultivate land and produce rice,
wheat and other food crops. Thus,
was born ‘Agriculture’.
When plants of the same kind are
cultivated at one place on a large scale,
it is called a crop. For example, crop of
wheat means that all the plants grown
in a field are that of wheat.
You alr eady know that cr ops ar e of
different types like cereals, vegetables
and fruits. These can be classified on the
basis of the season in which they grow.
India is a vast country. The climatic
conditions like temperature, humidity
and rainfall vary from one region to
another . Accordingly, ther e is a richYou have lear nt that all living
organisms require food. Plants can make
their food themselves. Can you recall
how green plants synthesise their own
food? Animals including humans can
not make their own food. So, where do
animals get their food from?
But, first of all why do we have to eat
food?
You alr eady know that ener gy from
the food is utilised by organisms for
carrying out their various body
functions, such as digestion, respiration
and excr
etion. W e get our food fr om
plants, or animals, or both.
Since we all need food,
how can we provide
food to a large number
of people in our
country?Food has to be
produced on a large
scale.
I want to know
where and how we
use these tools.
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 2variety of crops grown in different parts
of the country. Despite this diversity,
two broad cropping patterns can be
identified. These are:
(i) Kharif Crops : The crops which are
sown in the rainy season are called
kharif crops. The rainy season in India
is generally fr om June to September .
Paddy, maize, soyabean, groundnut and
cotton are kharif crops.
(ii) Rabi Crops : The crops grown in the
winter season (October to March) are
called rabi crops. Examples of rabi
crops are wheat, gram, pea, mustard
and linseed.
Besides these, pulses and vegetables
are grown during summer at many
places.
1.2Basic Practices of Crop
Productionto as agricultural practices  which are
listed below:
(i)Preparation of soil
(ii)Sowing
(iii)Adding manure and fertilisers
(iv)Irrigation
(v)Protecting from weeds
(vi)Harvesting
(vii)Storage
1.3 Preparation of Soil
The preparation of soil is the first step
before growing a crop. One of the most
important tasks in agriculture is to turn
the soil and loosen it. This allows the
roots to penetrate deep into the soil. The
loose soil allows the roots to breathe
easily even when they go deep into the
soil. Why does the loosening of soil allow
the roots to breathe easily?
The loosened soil helps in the growth
of earthworms and microbes present in
the soil. These organisms are friends of
the farmer since they further turn and
loosen the soil and add humus to it.
But why the soil needs to be turned and
loosened?
You have lear nt  in the pr evious
classes that soil contains minerals,
water , air and some living organisms.
In addition, dead plants and animals
get decomposed by soil organisms. In
this way, various nutrients in the dead
organisms are released back into the
soil. These nutrients are again absorbed
by plants.
Since only a few centimetres of the
top layer of soil supports plant growth,
turning and loosening of soil brings the
nutrient-rich soil to the top so that
plants can use these nutrients. Thus,Why  paddy can not be
grown in the winter season?
Paddy requires a lot of
water . Ther efore, it is gr own
only in the rainy season.
Cultivation of crops involves several
activities undertaken by farmers over a
period of time. Y ou may find that these
activities are similar to those carried out
by a gardener or even by you when you
grow ornamental plants in your house.
These activities or tasks are referred
Rationalised-2023-24
CROP PRODUCTION  AND MANAGEMENT 3turning and loosening of soil is very
important for cultivation of crops.
The process of loosening and turning
of the soil is called  tilling  or ploughing .
This is done by using a plough. Ploughs
are made of wood or iron. If the soil is
very dry, it may need watering before
ploughing. The ploughed field may have
big clumps of soil called crumbs. It is
necessary to break these crumbs.
Levelling the field is beneficial for
sowing as well as for irrigation. Levelling
of soil is done with the help of a leveller .
Sometimes, manure is added to the
soil before tilling. This helps in proper
mixing of manure with soil. The soil is
moistened before sowing.
Agricultural Implements
Before sowing the seeds, it is necessary to
break soil clumps to get better yield. This
is done with the help of various tools.
The main tools used for this purpose are
the plough, hoe and cultivator .Plough :  This is being used since
ancient times for tilling the soil, adding
fertili sers to the crop, removing the weeds
and turning the  soil. This is made of
wood and is drawn by a pair of bulls or
other animals  (horses and camels) . It
contains a strong triangular iron strip
called ploughshare. The main part of the
plough is a long log of wood which is
called a ploughshaft. There is a handle
at one end of the shaft. The other end is
attached to a beam which is placed on
the bulls’ necks. One pair of bulls and a
man can easily operate the plough
[Fig. 1.1 (a)].
The indigenous wooden plough is
increasingly being replaced by iron
ploughs nowadays.
Hoe : It is a simple tool which is used
for removing weeds and for loosening
the soil. It has a long rod of wood or
iron. A strong, broad and bent plate of
iron is fixed to one of its ends and
Fig. 1.1 (a) :  The plough
ploughshaft
ploughsharebeam
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 4Activity 1.1
Take a beaker and fill half of it
with water . Put a handful of wheat
seeds and stir well.  Wait for some
time.
Are there seeds which float on
water? W ould those be lighter or
heavier than those which sink? Why
would they be lighter? Damaged seeds
become hollow  and ar e thus lighter .
Therefore, they float o
n water .
This is a good method for
separating good, healthy seeds from
the damaged ones.
Before sowing , one of the important
tasks is to know about the tools used
for sowing seeds [Fig. 1.2 (a), (b)].
Traditional tool : The tool used
traditionally for sowing seeds is
shaped like a funnel [Fig. 1.2 (a)]. The
seeds are filled into the funnel,
passed down through two or three
pipes having sharp ends. These
ends pierce into the soil and place
seeds there.Cultivator : Nowadays ploughing is
done by tractor -driven cultivator . The
use of cultivator saves labour and time.
[Fig. 1.1 (c)].
Fig. 1.1 (b) : A hoe
Fig. 1.2 (a) :  Traditional method of sowing
Fig.  1.1 (c) :  Cultivator driven by a tractor
1.4 Sowing
Sowing is an important part of crop
production. Before sowing, good quality,
clean and healthy seeds of a good
variety —are selected. Farmers prefer to
use seeds which give high yield.
Selection of Seedsgrip beam
bent plate
rodhandle
One day I saw my mother put
some gram seeds in a vessel
and pour some water on
them. After a few minutes
some seeds started to float
on top. I wonder why some
seeds float on water!works like a blade. It is pulled by
animals [Fig. 1.1 (b)].
Rationalised-2023-24
CROP PRODUCTION  AND MANAGEMENT 5Seed drill :  Nowadays the seed drill [Fig.
1.2 (b)] is used for sowing with the help
of tractors. This sows the seeds
uniformly at equal distance and depth.
It ensures that seeds get covered by the
soil after sowing. This protects seeds
from being eaten by birds. Sowing by
using a seed drill saves time and labour .Fig. 1.2 (b) :  A seed drill
There is a nursery near my
school. I found that little
plants were kept in small
bags. Why are they
kept like this?
Seeds  of a few plants
such as paddy are first
grown in a nursery. When
they grow into seedlings,
they are transplanted to
the field manually. Some
forest plants and flowering
plants are also grown in
the nursery.
Appropriate distance between the
seeds is necessary to avoid overcrowding
of plants. This allows plants to get
I saw a healthy crop growing
in a farm. In the neighbouring
farm, the plants were weak.
Why do some plants grow
better than others?sufficient sunlight, nutrients and water
from the soil. At times a few plants
may have to be removed to prevent
overcrowding.
1.5Adding Manure  and
Fertilisers
The substances which are added to the
soil in the form of nutrients for the
healthy growth of plants are called
manure  and fertilisers .
Soil supplies mineral nutrients to the
crop plants. These nutrients are
essential for the growth of plants. In
certain areas, farmers grow crop after
crop in the same field. The field is never
left uncultivated or fallow. Imagine what
happens to the nutrients?
Continuous cultivation of crops
makes the soil poor in nutrients.
Therefore, farmers have to add manure
to the fields to replenish the soil with
nutrients. This process is called
manuring . Improper or insufficient
manuring results in weak plants.
Manure is an organic substance
obtained from the decomposition of
plant or animal wastes. Farmers dump
plant and animal waste in pits at open
places and allow it to decompose. The
decomposition is caused by some
microorganisms. The decomposed
matter is used as organic manure.
You have alr eady lear nt about
vermicomposting in Class VI.
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 6Activity 1.2
Take moong  or gram seeds and
germinate them. Select three equal
sized seedlings . Take three empty
glasses or similar vessels. Mark them
A, B and C. To glass A add little
amount of soil mixed with a little cow
dung manure. In glass B put the
same amount of soil mixed with a
little urea. Take the s a
me amount
of soil in glass C without adding
anything [Fig. 1.3(a)]. Now pour the
same amount of water in each glass
and plant the seedlings in them.
Keep them in a safe place and water
them daily . After 7 to 10 days
observe their growth [Fig. 1.3(b)].better growth of plants? In which glass
was the growth fastest?
Fertilisers are chemical s  which are
rich in a particular nutrient. How are
they different from manure? Fertilisers
are produced in factories. Some
examples of fertilisers are — urea,
ammonium sulphate, super
phosphate, potash, NPK (Nitrogen,
Phosphorus, Potassium).
The use of fertilisers has helped
farmers to get  better yield of crops
such as wheat, paddy and maize. But
excessive use of fertilisers has made
the soil less fertile. Fertilisers have  also
become a source of water pollution.
Therefore, in order to maintain  the
fertility of the soil, we have to
substitute fertilisers with organic
manure or leave the field uncultivated
(fallow) in between two crops.
The use of manure improves soil
texture as well as its water retaining
capacity. It replenishes the soil with
nutrients.
Another method of replenishing
the soil with nutrients is through crop
rotation . This can be done by growing
different crops alter nately.  Earlier ,
farmers in northern India used to
grow legumes as fodder in one season
and wheat in the next season. This
helped in the replenishment of the soil
with nitrogen. Farmers are being
encouraged to adopt this practice.
In the previous classes, you have
learnt about Rhizobium  bacteria.
These are present in the nodules of
roots of leguminous plants. They fix
atmospheric nitrogen.
Fig. 1.3 (a) : Preparation of the experiment
Did  plants in all the glasses grow at
the same pace? Which glass showed
Fig. 1.3 (b) :Growing seedlings with manure
and fertiliser
Rationalised-2023-24
CROP PRODUCTION  AND MANAGEMENT 7
Table 1.1 gives the  differences
between a fertili ser and manure.
Advantages of Manure : The organic
manure is considered better than
fertilisers. This is  because
/circle6it enhances the water holding
capacity of the soil.
/circle6it makes the soil porous due to which
exchange of gases becomes easy.
/circle6it increases the number of friendly
microbes.
/circle6it improves the texture of the soil.
1.6 Irrigation
All living beings need water to live.
Water is important for pr oper gr owth
and development. W ater is absorbed by
the plant r oots. Along with water ,
minerals and fertilisers are also
absorbed. Plants contain nearly 90%
water . Water is essential because
germination of seeds does not take place
under dry conditions. Nutrients
dissolved in water are transported to
each part of the plant. W ater alsoprotects the crop from both frost and
hot air currents. To maintain the
moisture of the soil for healthy crop
growth, fields have to be watered
regularly.
The supply of water to crops at
regular intervals is called irrigation . The
time and frequency of irrigation varies
from crop to crop, soil to soil and season
to season. In summer , the fr equency of
watering is higher . Why is it so? Could
it be due to the increased rate of
evaporation of water from the soil and
the leaves?Table 1.1 : Differences between Fertiliser and Manure
S. No. Fertiliser Manure
1. Fertiliser is a man-made Manure is a natural substance obtained
inorganic salt. by the decomposition of cattle dung
and plant residues.
2. Fertiliser is prepared in Manure can be prepared in the fields.
factories.
3. Fertiliser does not provide Manure provides a lot of humus to the soil.
any humus to the soil.
4. Fertilisers are very rich in Manure is relatively less rich in plant
plant nutrients like nitrogen, nutrients.
phosphorus and potassium.
Sources of irrigation : The sources of
water for irrigation are— wells,
tubewells, ponds, lakes, rivers, dams
and  canals.I am very careful this
year about watering
the plants. Last
summer my plants
dried up and died.
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 8
Fig. 1.4 (a) :  Moat
Fig. 1.4 (b) :  Chain pump
Fig. 1.4 (d) :  RahatFig. 1.4 (c) : DhekliTraditional Methods of
Irrigation
The water available in wells,
lakes and canals is lifted up
by different methods in
different regions, for taking it
to the fields.
Cattle or human labour is
used in these methods. So
these methods ar e cheaper ,
but less efficient. The various
traditional ways are:
(i)moat (pulle y-system)
(ii)chain pump
(iii)dhekli, and
(iv)rahat
 (Lever system)
[Figs. 1.4 (a)- (d)].
Pumps are commonly
used for lifting water . Diesel,
biogas, electricity and
solar energy is used to run
these pumps.
Rationalised-2023-24
CROP PRODUCTION  AND MANAGEMENT 9Modern Methods of
Irrigation
Modern methods of irrigation
help us to use water
economically. The main
methods used are as follows:
(i)Sprinkler System: This
system is more useful on the
uneven land where sufficient
water is not available. The
perpendicular pipes, having
rotating nozzles on top, are
joined to the main pipeline
at regular intervals. When
water is allowed to flow
through the main pipe under pressure
with the help of a pump, it escapes from
the rotating nozzles. It gets sprinkled
on the crop as if it is raining.
Sprinkler is very useful for lawns, coffee
plantation and several other crops
[Fig. 1.5 (a)].
Fig. 1.5 (b) :  Drip System
Fig. 1.5 (a) :  Sprinkler system
(ii)Drip system : In this system, the
water falls drop by drop directly near
the roots. So it is called drip system. It
is the best technique for watering fruit
plants,  gardens and trees [Fig. 1.5(b)].
Water is  not wasted at all. It is a boon in
regions wher e availability of water is poor .
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 101.7 Pr otection fr om W eeds
Boojho and Paheli went to a nearby
wheat field and saw that there were some
other plants in the field, growing along
with wheat plants.
Have these other
plants been planted
purposely?
In a field many other undesirable
plants may grow naturally along with
the crop. These undesirable plants are
called weeds .
The removal of weeds is called
weeding. W eeding is necessary since
weeds compete with the crop plants for
water , nutrients, space and light. Thus,
they affect the growth of the crop. Some
weeds inter fere even in harvesting and
may be poisonous for animals and
human beings.
Farmers adopt many ways to remove
weeds and contr ol their growth. T illing
before sowing of crops helps in
uprooting and killing of weeds, which
may then dry up and get mixed with
the soil. The best time for the removal
of weeds is before they produce flowers
and seeds. The manual removal includes
physical removal of weeds by uprooting
or cutting them close to the ground,
from time to time. This is done with the
help of a 
khurpi. A seed drill [Fig. 1.2(b)]
is also used to uproot weeds.
Weeds ar e also controlled by using
certain chemicals, called weedicides ,
like 2,4-D. These are sprayed in the
fields to kill the weeds. They do not
damage the crops. The weedicides are
diluted with water to the extent required
and sprayed in the fields with a sprayer .
(Fig. 1.6).
Do weedicides have any
effect on the person handling
the weedicide sprayer?Fig. 1.6 : Spraying weedicide
As already mentioned, the  weedicides
are sprayed during the vegetative growth
of weeds before flowering and seed
formation. Spraying of weedicides may
affect the health of  farmer s. So they
should use these chemicals very carefully.
They should cover their nose and mouth
with a piece of cloth during spraying of
these chemicals.
1.8Harvesting
Harvesting of a crop is an important
task. The cutting of crop after it is
mature is called harvesting . In
harvesting, crops are pulled out or cut
close to the ground. It usually takes 3
to 4 months for a cereal crop to mature.
Harvesting in our
country is either done
manually by sickle
(Fig. 1.7) or by a machine
called harvester . In the
harvested crop, the grain
seeds need to be separatedFig. 1.7 :
Sickle
Rationalised-2023-24
CROP PRODUCTION  AND MANAGEMENT 11from the chaff. This process is called
threshing . This is carried out with the
help of a machine called ‘combine’ which
is in fact a  harvester as well as a  thresher
(Fig. 1.8).
Fig. 1.8 :  Combine
After harvesting, sometimes
stubs are left in the field, which
are burnt by farmers. Paheli is
worried. She knows that it
causes pollution. It may also
catch fire and damage the crops
lying in the fields.
Harvest Festivals
After three or four months of hard
work there comes the day of the
harvest. The sight of golden fields
of standing crop, laden with grain,
fills the hearts of farmers with joy
and a sense of well -being. The
efforts of the past season have
borne fruit and it is time to relax
and enjoy a little. The period of
harvest is, thus, of great joy and
happiness in all parts of India.
Men and women celebrate it with
great enthusiasm. Special
festivals associated with the
harvest season are Pongal,
Baisakhi, Holi, Diwali, Nabanya
and Bihu.
1.9Storage
Storage of produce is an important task.
If the harvested grains are to be kept
for longer time, they should be safe
from moisture, insects, rats and
microorganisms. Harvested grains have
more moisture. If freshly harvested
grains (seeds) are stored without drying,
they may get spoilt or attacked by
organisms, making them unfit for use
or for germination. Hence, before
storing them, the grains are properly
dried in the sun to reduce the moisture
in them. This prevents the attack by
insect pests, bacteria and fungi.Farmers with small holdings of land
do the separation of grain and chaff by
winnowing (Fig. 1.9). Y ou have alr eady
studied this in Class VI.
Fig. 1.9 : Winnowing machine
I saw my mother putting
some dried neem leaves
in an iron drum
containing wheat.
I wonder why?
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 121.10 Food from Animals
Fig. 1.10 (a) :  Silos for storage of grains
Fig. 1.10 (b) : Storage of grains in
gunny bags in granaries
Farmers store grains in jute bags or
metallic bins. However , large scale
storage of grains is done in silos  and
granaries  to protect them from pests
like rats and insects [Fig. 1.10 (a)
and (b)].
Dried neem leaves are used for
storing food grains at home. For storing
large quantities of grains in big
godowns, specific chemical treatments
are required to protect them from pests
and microorganisms.Activity 1.3
Make the following Table in your
note book and complete it.
S.No. Food Sources
1. Milk Cow, Buffalo, She-
goat, She-camel . . .
2.
3.
4.
Fish is good for health.
We get cod liver oil fr om fish
which is rich in vitamin D.After completing this Table, you
must have seen that, like plants,
animals also provide us with different
kinds of food. Many people living in the
coastal areas consume fish as a major
part of their diet. In the previous classes
you have learnt about the food that we
obtain fr om plants. W e have just seen
that the process of crop production
involves a number of steps like selection
of seeds, sowing, etc. Similarly, animals
reared at home or in farms, have to be
provided with proper food, shelter and
care. When this is done on a large scale,
it is called animal husbandry.
Rationalised-2023-24
CROP PRODUCTION  AND MANAGEMENT 13
     KEYWORDSKEYWORDSKEYWORDSKEYWORDSKEYWORDS
AGRICULTURAL
PRACTICES
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY
CROP
FERTILISER
GRANARIES
HARVESTING
IRRIGA TION
KHARIF
MANURE
PLOUGH
RABI
SEEDS
SILO
SOWING
STORAGE
THRESHING
WEEDS
WEEDICIDE
WINNOWING WHA  WHA WHA  WHA WHA T YT YT Y T YT YOU HA OU HAOU HA OU HAOU HA VE LEARNTVE LEARNTVE LEARNTVE LEARNTVE LEARNT
/circlerightIn order to provide food to our growing
population, we need to adopt certain
agricultural practices.
/circlerightSame kind of plants cultivated at a place
constitute a crop.
/circlerightIn India, crops can be broadly categorised into
two types based on seasons - rabi and kharif
crops.
/circlerightIt is necessary to prepare soil by tilling and
levelling. Ploughs and levellers are used for
this purpose.
/circlerightSowing of seeds at appropriate depths and
distances gives good yield. Good variety of
seeds are sown after selection of healthy seeds.
Sowing is done by seed drills.
/circlerightSoil needs replenishment and enrichment
through the use of organic manure and
fertilisers. Use of chemical fertilisers has
increased tremendously with the introduction
of new crop varieties.
/circlerightSupply of water to crops at appropriate
intervals is called irrigation.
/circlerightWeeding involves r emoval of unwanted and
uncultivated plants called weeds.
/circlerightHarvesting is the cutting of the mature crop
manually or by machines.
/circlerightSeparation of the grains from the chaff is called
threshing.
/circlerightProper storage of grains is necessary to protect
them from pests and microorganisms.
/circlerightFood is also obtained  from animals for which
animals are reared. This is called animal
husbandry.
Exercises
  1.Select the correct word from the following list and fill in the blanks.
float, water , crop, nutrients, pr eparation
(a)The same kind of plants grown and cultivated on a large scale at a
place is called _____________ .
(b)The first step before growing crops is _____________  of the soil.
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 14(c)Damaged seeds would _____________  on top of water .
(d)For growing a crop, sufficient sunlight and _____________  and
_____________  from the soil are essential.
  2.Match items in column A  with those in column B
.
A B
(i)Kharif crops (a)Food for cattle
(ii)Rabi crops (b)Urea and super phosphate
(iii)Chemical fertilisers (c)Animal excreta, cow dung
urine and plant waste
(iv)Organic manure (d)Wheat, gram, pea
(e)Paddy and maize
  3.Give two examples of each.
(a) Kharif  crop
(b) Rabi crop
  4.Write a paragraph in your own wor ds on each of the following.
(a)Preparation of soil (b)    Sowing
(c)Weeding (d)    Threshing
  5.Explain how fertilisers are different from manure.
  6.What is irrigation? Describe two methods of irrigation which conserve water .
  7.If wheat is sown in the kharif season, what would happen? Discuss.
  8.Explain how soil gets affected by the continuous plantation of crops in
a field.
 9.What are weed s? How can we control them?
10.Arrange the following boxes in proper order to make a flow chart of
sugarcane crop production.E X E R C I S E S
Sending crop to
sugar factoryIrrigation Harvesting Sowing
1 2 3 4
Preparation of
soilPloughing the
fieldManuring
5 6 7
Rationalised-2023-24
CROP PRODUCTION  AND MANAGEMENT 1511.Complete the following word puzzle with the help of clues given below.
Down
1.Providing water to the crops.
2.Keeping crop grains for a long time under proper conditions.
5.Certain plants of the same kind grown on a large scale.
Across
3.A machine used for cutting the matured crop.
4.A rabi crop that is also one of the pulses.
6.A process of separating the grain from chaff.E X E R C I S E S
Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1.Sow some seeds in the soil and arrange to water them by drip
irrigation. Observe daily.
(i)Do you think it can save water?
(ii)Note the changes in the seed.
2.Collect different types of seeds and put them in small bags.
Label them.
3.Collect pictures of some other agricultural machines and paste them
in a file. W rite their names and uses.
4.Project W ork
Visit a farm, nursery or a garden nearby. Gather information about
(i)importance of seed selection.
(ii)method of irrigation.
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 16An Example for Field T rip W ork
Himanshu and his friends were very anxious and curious to go to Thikri village.
They went to Shri Jiwan Patel’s farmhouse. They had taken bags to collect some
seeds and other things.
Himanshu :Sir namaskar , I am Himanshu. Her e are my friends Mohan, David
and Sabiha. W e want some infor mation about cr ops. Please guide
us.
Shri Patel :Namaskar  and welcome all of you. What are your queries?
Sabiha :When did you start this work and what are the main crops that
you grow?
Shri Patel :About 75 years ago, my grandfather started this work. The main
crops that we grow are wheat, gram, soyabean and moong .
David :Sir, can you tell us the dif ference between traditional and moder n
agricultural practices?
Shri Patel :Earlier we used traditional tools like sickle, bullock plough, trowel,
etc., and depended on rain water for irrigation. But now we use
moder n methods of irrigation. W e use implements like tractors,
cultivators, seed drill and harvester . We get good quality seeds.
We carry out soil testing and use manur e and fertilisers. New
information about agricultur e is obtained thr ough radio, T .V. and
other sources. As a result we are able to get good crops on a large
scale. This year we got 9 to 11 quintals of gram crop/acre and 20
to 25 quintals of wheat/acre. In my opinion awareness of new
technology is important for better crop yield.
Mohan :Sabiha, come here and see some earthworms. Are they helpful to
the farmers?
Sabiha :Oh Mohan! we learnt about it in Class VI.
Shri Patel :Earthworms turn the soil and loosen it for proper aeration, so
they help the far mer.
David :Can we have some seeds of the crops you grow here?
[They put some seeds, fertilisers and soil sample in the bags.]
Himanshu :Sir, we ar e thankful to you for making this visit pleasant and for
providing useful information.(iii)effect of extreme cold and extreme hot weather on the plants.
(iv)effect of continuous rain on the plants.
(v)fertilisers/manure used.
Rationalised-2023-24
