SCIENCE
TEXTBOOK  FOR CLASS VIIISCIENCE
Rationalised-2023-24
First Edition
January  2008  Magha 1929
Reprint Edition
December 2008, January  2010,
November 2010, January 2012,
November 2012, October 2013,
December 2014, December 2015,
February 2017, December 2017,
December 2018, August 2019,
January  2021 and November  2021
Revised Edition
November  2022  Kartika 1944
PD 950T BS
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2008, 2022
` 65.00ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
qNo part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior
permission of the publisher .
qThis book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of
trade,  be lent,  re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the
publisher’s consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in
which it is published.
qThe correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page,
Any revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any
other means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICA TION
DIVISION, , NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016 Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bangaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata  700 114 Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781  021 Phone :  0361-2674869
Publication Team
Head, Publication :Anup Kumar Rajput
Division
Chief Production :Arun Chitkara
Officer
Chief Business :Vipin Dewan
Manager
Chief Editor (In charge) :Bijnan Sutar
Assistant Editor :Shashi Chadha
Assistant Production :Deepak Jaiswal
Officer
Cover,  Layout and Illustrations
Ashwani TyagiPrinted on 80 GSM paper with NCER T
watermark
Published at the Publication Division,
by the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016 and
printed at Amit Printing Press, D-12 and 13,
Industrial Area, Site-A, Mathura- 281 001
(U.P.)ISBN  978-81-7450-812-60854 – SCIENCE
Textbook for Class VIII
Rationalised-2023-24
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that children’s life
at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a
departure from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our system
and causes a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi and
textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic
idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp
boundaries between dif ferent subject ar eas. W e hope these measur es will take us
significantly further in the direction of a child-centred system of education outlined
in the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and
teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to
pursue imaginative activities and questions. W e must r ecognise that, given space,
time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with the
information passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the
sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites
of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we
perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed
body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change i n school routines and mode of
functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in
implementing the annual calendar so that the required number of teaching days
are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching and evaluation
will also determine how effective this textbook proves for making children’s life at
school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus
designers have tried to address the problem of curricular burden by restructuring
and reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration for child
psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance
this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to opportunities for
contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups and activities requiring
hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Resear ch and T raining (NCER T) appr eciates
the hard work done by the textbook development committee responsible for this
book. W e wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory gr oup in science and
mathematics, Pr ofessor J.V . Narlikar and the Chief Advisor for this book,
Professor V .B. Bhatia for guiding the work of this committee. Several teachers
contributed to the development of this textbook. W e are grateful to their principals
for making this possible. W e are indebted to the institutions and or ganisations
which have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and
personnel. W e are especially grateful to the members of the National Monitoring
Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and Higher Education,Foreword
Rationalised-2023-24
Ministry of Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of
Professor Mrinal Miri and Pr ofessor G.P . Deshpande, for their valuable time
and contribution.
As an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous
improvement in the quality of its pr oducts, NCER T welcomes comments
and suggestions which will enable us to undertake further revision and
refinement.
Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
30 November 2007 Research and Trainingiv
Rationalised-2023-24
Rationalisation of Content
in the Textbooks
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load
on students. The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises reducing
the content load and providing opportunities for experiential learning with
creative mindset. In this backgr ound, the NCER T has undertaken the
exercise to rationalise the textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomes
already developed by the NCER T acr oss classes have been taken into
consideration in this exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the
following:
•Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in
the same class
•Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same
subject
•Difficulty level
•Content, which is easily accessible to students without much
interventions from teachers and can be learned by children through
self-lear ning or peer -learning
•Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the
changes given above.
Rationalised-2023-24
Rationalised-2023-24
This book is the outcome of the efforts of the textbook development committee
appointed by the NCER T. The committee met a few times to interact with one
another to improve the draft. Then there was a review meeting in which many
experts and practicing school teachers were invited to review the draft and suggest
improvements.
By and large we have stuck to the format of the Class VII book. By now famous
characters, Boojho and Paheli, have been used to make the text interactive. Attempt
has been made to recall children’s own experiences and build concepts around
them. This is designed to connect science that they study in the school with their
everyday life.
Many activities have been suggested to clarify concepts. Some of these activities
are so simple that children can perform them on their own. The requirement of the
apparatus r equir ed for the activities is minimal. W e per formed all the activities
ourselves to ensure that there was no difficulty in performing them in the school
situation. The activities should also help children in developing skills such as
presentation of data in tabular and graphical forms, reasoning and drawing inference
from the given data.
The language of the book has been kept as simple as possible. A large number of
photographs, illustrations, cartoons, etc. have been included to make the book
attractive. To help teachers evaluate children effectively, a large number of exercises
have been given at the end of each chapter . The teachers ar
e encouraged to frame
additional exercises to test children’s understanding. Some challenging exercises
have also been devised for those children who would like to appear for the National
Talent Sear ch Examination conducted by the NCER T.
We are conscious of the fact that ther e is a paucity of additional r eading material
for children. W e have tried to addr ess this pr oblem by pr oviding non-evaluative
boxes . These boxes, in light orange, contain additional information, anecdotes,
stories, strange facts and other such interesting materials.
We all know that children ar e mischievous and playful by natur e. Ther efore, in
order to prevent any untoward incident during the performance of the activities in
the school or outside, necessary cautions, in magenta, have been inserted at various
places in the book.
To prepare children to assume their roles as responsible citizens of tomorrow,
attempt has been made to sensitise them to the issues concer ning gender , religion,
envir onment, health and hygiene, water scar city and ener gy conservation. W e have
sought to weave into the text the value of cooperation and the importance of peer
learning.
An important feature of the book is what we call Extended Learning . These are
totally non-evaluative , and purely voluntary activities and projects. Some of the
projects in this section have been designed to enhance children’s interaction with
the experts, teachers, even parents, and society at large. The children are required
to collect information of various kinds and draw conclusions of their own.
My request to teachers and parents is to use the book in the spirit in which it
has been written. Encourage children to perform activities and learn by doing, rather
than by r ote. Y ou can supplement, or even r eplace, the activities given her e. If youPreface
Rationalised-2023-24
feel that you have better alter natives, especially with your local/r egional flavour ,
please write to us so that these activities could be used in the future editions of
the book.
We have been able to include only a small subset of childr en’s experiences. Y ou
have a better knowledge of their experiences because you are in touch with them.
Use them to illustrate the concepts being taught. Above all, please do not stifle
children’s natural curiosity. Encourage them to ask questions, even if sometimes
you feel uncomfortable. If you do not know the answer to a question on the spot, do
not feel embarrassed. Y ou can pr omise them to find the answer and deal with it
later. Make a genuine attempt to get the answer fr om whatever r esour ces ar e within
your reach, such as senior school or college teachers, experts, libraries, internet
etc. If, inspite of your efforts, you cannot get the answer to some question, you could
write to NCER T.
I must thank the NCER T for enabling us to talk to childr en thr ough the medium
of this book. Every member of the NCER T has been courteous and helpful to us.
In the end, I must express my gratitude to the members of the Editing Team,
who worked tirelessly to help me bring the book to the present form. If you and your
students find this book useful and enjoy teaching/learning science through this
book, the Editing Team and I shall consider ourselves well-rewarded.
V.B. B HATIA
Chief Advisor
Textbook Development Committeeviii
Rationalised-2023-24
CHAIRPERSON , ADVISORY  GROUP FOR TEXTBOOKS  IN SCIENCE  AND MATHEMATICS
J.V. Narlikar , Emeritus Pr ofessor , Inter University Centr e for Astr onomy and
Astrophysics (IUCCA), Ganeshkhind, Pune University, Pune
CHIEF ADVISOR
V.B. Bhatia,  Professor (Retd.) (Physics) ,  Delhi University, Delhi
MEMBERS
Bharati Sarkar , Reader (Retd.) (Zoology) , Maitr eyi College, Delhi University, Delhi
C. V. Shimray, Lectur er, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics,
(DESM), NCER T, Sri Aur obindo Mar g, New Delhi
Gagandeep Bajaj, Lectur er, Department of Education, SPM College, Delhi
University, Delhi
H.C. Jain , Principal, (Retd.)  Regional Institute of Education, Ajmer
Harsh Kumari, Headmistress,
 CIE Experimental Basic School, Department of
Education, Delhi University, Delhi
J. S. Gill, Professor (Retd.), DESM, NCER T, Sri Aur obindo Marg, New Delhi
Kanhiya Lal, Principal (Retd.) , Directorate of Education, Delhi
Lalita S. Kumar , Reader (Chemistry),  School of Sciences, Indira Gandhi National
Open University (IGNOU), Maidan Garhi, New Delhi
P.C. Agarwal, Reader , Regional Institute of Education, Ajmer
P.S. Yadava, Professor , Department of Life Sciences, Manipur University, Imphal
Puranchand,  Professor and Joint Director (Retd.), Central Institute of Educational
Technology (CIET), NCER T, Sri Aur obindo Marg, New Delhi
R. Joshi, Lectur er (SG),   DESM, NCER T, Sri Aur obindo Mar g, New Delhi
Rachna Gar g, Lectur er, Central Institute of Educational T echnology (CIET),
NCER T, Sri Aur obindo Mar g, New Delhi
Rashmi Shar ma, Lectur er, North-East Regional Institute of Education, Shillong
R.K. Parashar , Reader , Regional Institute of Education, Bhubaneshwar
Ruchi V erma, Lectur er, DESM, NCER T, Sri Aur obindo Mar g, New Delhi
Shashi Prabha, Lectur er, DESM, NCER T, Sri Aur obindo Mar g, New Delhi
Sunila Masih, Teacher , Mitra GHS School, Suhagpur , P.O. Hoshangabad,
Madhya Pradesh
MEMBER -COORDINATOR
R. S. Sindhu, Professor , DESM, NCER T, Sri Aur obindo Mar g, New DelhiTextbook Development Committee
Rationalised-2023-24
The National Council of Educational Research and T raining (NCER T)
acknowledges the valuable contribution of the individuals and
organisations involved in the development of this book. The Council
acknowledges the valuable contribution of the following academics for
reviewing and refining the manuscript of this book: K.C. Sharma, Reader
(Physics),  Regional Institute of Education, Ajmer; Charu V erma, Lectur er
(Science), DIET , Pitampura, Delhi; Geeta Bajaj, TGT (Science), K.V. No. 3,
Delhi Cantt., New Delhi; K.D. Shar ma, TGT (Science), R.P.V.V. Civil Lines,
Delhi; Manohar Lal Patel, Teacher , Govt. R.N.A. Higher Secondary School,
Pipariya, Madhya Pradesh; Reeta Sharma, Reader (Botany) , Regional
Institute of Education, Bhopal; Kamal Deep Peter , OEI, Oracle India,
Bangalore; Puneeta Sharma, TGT (Science), L.D. Jain Girls Senior
Secondary School, Sadar Bazar , Delhi; M.C. Das, Teacher (Science),  Govt.
Secondary School,  Zoom, W est Sikkim; Deepti Kohli, P .D. Public School,
Shalimar Bagh, Delhi; Sulekha Chandra, Reader (Chemistry) , Zakir
Husain College, Delhi University, Delhi; R.S. T omar , TGT (Science) , J.N.V .
Mothuka, Faridabad (Haryana); Anjali Khirwadkar , Lectur er, Department
of Education, M.S. University, Baroda (Gujrat); Suresh Chand, TGT
(Science),  J.N.V . Ghaziabad Uttar Pradesh; Satheesh H.L., TGT (Science),
Demonstration School, Regional Institute of Education, Mysore; Simminder
Kaur Thukral, NIIT , Kalkaji, New Delhi; M.M. Kapoor , Professor  (Retd.)
(Chemistry),  Delhi University, Delhi; Sarita Kumar , Reader (Zoology) ,
Acharya Narendra Dev College, Delhi University, Delhi. The  contributions
of Pushplata V erma, R.R. Koir eng, Pramila T anvar and Ashish K.
Srivastava, Assistant Professors ,  are acknowledged for being a part of
the review of this textbook.
The Council gratefully acknowledges the valuable suggestions received
from the  
National Monitoring Committee in the development of the
manuscript of this textbook.
The dynamic leadership of Professor Hukum Singh, Head, DESM, for
providing guidance at different stages of development of the textbook and
extending infrastructure facilities is highly acknowledged. Special thanks
are due to Shveta Uppal, Chief Editor  and Shashi Chadha, Assistant
Editor for  going through the manuscript and suggesting relevant changes.
The Council also acknowledges the ef forts of Deepak Kapoor ,
Inchar ge Computer Station , Inder Kumar , DTP Operator ; K.T. Chitralekha,
Copy Editor and Ritu Jha , Proof Reader .
The contributions of APC-office, administration of DESM, Publication
Department and Secr etariat of NCER T is also acknowledged.Acknowledgements
Rationalised-2023-24
To
The Head
Department of Education in
Science and Mathematics,
NCER T, Sri Aur obindo Mar g,
New Delhi 110016The team of Paheli and Boojho will be with you as you journey through this
textbook. They love to ask questions. All kinds of questions come to their
minds and they collect them in their sacks. Sometimes, they may share some
of the questions with you, as you read through the chapters.
Paheli and Boojho are also on the lookout for answers to many
questions — sometimes the questions seem answered after they discuss them
with each other , sometimes thr ough discussions with other classmates, teachers
or their parents. Answers to some questions do not seem available even after
all these. They might need to experiment on their own, read books in the library,
send questions to scientists. Just dig and dig and dig into all possibilities and
see if the questions can be answered. Perhaps, they would carry some of the
unanswered questions in their sacks to higher classes.
What will really thrill them would be your adding questions to their sacks
or answers to their questions. Sometimes, activities are suggested in the
textbook, results or findings of these by different groups of students would be
of inter est to other students and teachers. Y ou can complete the suggested
activities and send your results or findings to Paheli and Boojho. Do keep in
mind that activities that involve using blades, scissors or fire need to be done
strictly under the care of your teachers. Stick to the precautions given and
then enjoy doing all the suggested activities. Mind, the book will not be able to
help you much, if the activities are not completed!
We would like to advise you that you must make observations yourself
and record whatever results you get. Keen and true observations are necessary
for exploring any subject of study. For some reason your results may turn out
to be dif ferent fr om those of your classmates. Do not worry. T ry to find out the
reason for these results instead of disregarding them. Do not ever copy results
from your classmate.
You can send your feedback for Paheli and Boojho at:A Note for the Students
Rationalised-2023-24
WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA,
[SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC]
JUSTICE,
LIBERTY
EQUALITY
FRATERNITY
IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY
HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO
OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION.having
solemnly resolved to constitute India into a
and to secure
to all its citizens :
social, economic and
political;
of thought, expression, belief,
faith and worship;
of status and of opportunity;
and to promote among them all
assuring the dignity of
the individual and the [unity and
integrity of the Nation];
this twenty-sixth day of November, 1949 do1
2
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, Sec.2,
for"Sovereign Democratic
Republic" (w.e.f. 3.1.1977)
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, Sec.2,
for "Unity of the Nation" (w.e.f. 3.1.1977)THE CONSTITUTION OF
INDIA
PREAMBLE
Rationalised-2023-24
CONTENTSFOREWORD iii
RATIONALISATION  OF CONTENT  IN THE TEXTBOOKS v
PREFACE vii
Chapter  1
CROP PRODUCTION  AND MANAGEMENT 1
Chapter  2
MICROORGANISMS : F RIEND AND FOE 17
Chapter  3
COAL AND PETROLEUM 32
Chapter  4
COMBUSTION  AND FLAME 40
Chapter 5
CONSER VATION OF PLANTS AND ANIMALS 53
Chapter 6
REPRODUCTION  IN ANIMALS 66
Chapter 7
REACHING THE AGE OF ADOLESCENCE 79
Chapter 8
FORCE AND PRESSURE 93
Chapter 9
FRICTION 112
Chapter 10
SOUND 123CONTENTS
Rationalised-2023-24
xivCONTENTSCONTENTSChapter 11
CHEMICAL  EFFECTS  OF ELECTRIC C URRENT 138
Chapter  12
SOME NATURAL  PHENOMENA 150
Chapter  13
LIGHT 165
Rationalised-2023-24
