CONSERVATION  OF PLANTS AND ANIMALS CONSERVATION  OF PLANTS AND ANIMALS
We saw in Class VII that
Paheli  and  Boojho  had visited
the forest along with Professor
Ahmad and T ibu. They wer e eager to
share their experiences with their
classmates. Other children in the class
were also eager to share their experiences
as some of them had visited Bharatpur
Sanctuary. Some others had heard
about  Kaziranga National Park,
Lockchao Wildlife Sanctuary, Great
Nicobar Biospher e Reserve and T iger
Reserve, etc.Some natural causes of deforestation
are forest fires and severe droughts.
Activity 5.1
Add more causes of deforestation to
your list and classify them into
natural and man-made.
5.2Consequences of
Deforestation
Paheli and Boojho recalled the
consequences of deforestation. They
remembered that deforestation increases
the temperature and pollution level on
the earth. It increases the level of carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere. Ground water
level also gets lowered. They know that
deforestation disturbs the balance in
nature. They were told by Professor
Ahmad that if cutting of trees continues,
rainfall and the  fertility of the soil will
5.1 Deforestation and Its
Causes
A great variety of plants and animals
exist on earth. They are essential for the
well-being and survival of mankind.
Today, a major threat to survival of these
organisms is deforestation . We know
that deforestation means clearing of
forests and using that land for other
purposes. T r
ees in the for est ar e cut for
some of the purposes mentioned below:
lProcuring land for cultivation.
lBuilding houses and factories.
lMaking furniture or using wood as
fuel.How does deforestation reduce
rainfall on the one hand and
lead to floods on the other?
decr ease. Mor eover , ther e will be
increased chances of natural calamities
such as floods and droughts.
Recall that plants need carbon
dioxide for photosynthesis. Fewer trees
would mean that less carbon dioxide will
be used up resulting in its increasedWhat is the purpose of
making national parks,
wildlife sanctuaries and
biosphere reserves?
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 54amount in the atmosphere. This will lead
to global warming as carbon dioxide
traps the heat rays reflected by the earth.
The increase in temperature on the earth
disturbs the water cycle and may reduce
rainfall. This could cause droughts .
Deforestation is a major cause which
leads to the change in soil properties.
Physical properties of the soil get affected
by plantation and vegetation. Fewer
trees result in more soil erosion.
Removal of the top layer of the soil
exposes the lower , har d and r ocky
layers. This soil has less humus and is
less fertile. Gradually the fertile land
gets converted into deserts. It is called
desertification .
Deforestation also leads to a decrease
in the water holding capacity of the soil.
The movement of water from the soil
surface into the gr ound (infiltration rate)
is reduced. So, there are floods. The
other properties of the soil like nutrient
content, texture etc., also change
because of deforestation.
We have studied in Class VII that we
get many products from forests. List these
products. Will we face shortage of these
products if we continue cutting trees?
Activity 5.2
Animal life is also affected by
deforestation. How? List the points
and discuss them in your class.
5.3 Conservation of Forest
and Wildlife
Having become aware of the effects of
deforestation, Paheli and Boojho are
worried. They go to Professor Ahmad
and ask him how forests and wildlife
can be saved.Biosphere is that part of the earth in
which living organisms exist or which
supports life. Biological diversity or
biodiversity, refers  to the variety of
organisms existing on the earth, their
interrelationships and their
relationship with the environment.
Professor  Ahmad organi ses a visit to
a biosphere reserve for Paheli, Boojho and
their classmates. He selects a place
named Pachmarhi Biosphere Reserve. He
knows that the plants and animals found
here are similar to those of the upper
Himalayan peaks and to those belonging
to the lower western ghats. Professor
Ahmad believes that the biodiversity
found here is unique. He requests
Madhavji, a forest employee, to guide the
children inside the biosphere reserve. He
explains that preserving areas of such
biological importance make them a part
of our national heritage .
Madhavji explains to the children
that apart from our personal efforts and
efforts of the society, government
To protect our flora and fauna and their
habitats, protected areas  called
wildlife sanctuaries, national parks
and biosphere reserves have been
earmarked. Plantation, cultivation,
grazing, felling trees, hunting and
poaching are prohibited there.
Wildlife Sanctuary :  Areas where
animals are protected from any
disturbance to them and their habitat .
National Park : Areas reserved for
wild life where they can freely use the
habitats and natural resources.
Biosphere Reserve : Large areas of
protected land for conservation of wild
life, plant and animal resources and
traditional life of the tribals living in
the area.
Rationalised-2023-24
CONSER VATION OF PLANTS AND ANIMALS 55agencies also take care of the forests and
animals. The government lays down
rules, methods and policies to protect
and conserve them. Wildlife sanctuaries,
national parks, biosphere reserves etc.,
are protected areas for conservation
of plants and animals present in
that area.
Activity 5.3
Find out the number of national
parks, wildlife sanctuaries and
biosphere reserves in your district,
state and country. Record in  Table
5.1. Show these areas in an outline
map of your state and India.
Fig. 5.1 :  Pachmarhi Biosphere Reserve5.4Biosphere Reserve
Children along with Professor Ahmad
and Madhavji enter the biosphere
reserve area. Madhavji explains that
biosphere reserves  are the areas meant
for conservation of biodiversity. As you
are aware that biodiversity is the variety
of plants, animals and microorganisms
generally found in an area.  The
biosphere reserves  help to maintain the
biodiversity and culture of that area. A
biosphere reserve may also contain
other protected areas in it. The
Pachmarhi Biosphere Reserve consists
of one national park named Satpura and
two wildlife sanctuaries named Bori and
Pachmarhi (Fig. 5.1).
PACHMARHI SANCTUARY
TO PIP ARIYATAW
A
RESERVIOR
CHURNA
BORI SANCTUARYDHAINBORISATPURA NA TIONAL PARKNEEMGHANPANARP ANI GA TE
PACHMARHI↑N
Table 5.1 : Protected Areas for Conservation
Protected Areas — National Park Wildlife Sanctuary Biosphere Reserve
In my district
In my state
In my country
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 56
(d)             (e) (f)
Fig.  5.2  : (a) W ild dog (b) Cheetal (c) Wolf (d) Leopar d (e) Fern (f) Jamun tr eeActivity  5.4
List the factors disturbing the
biodiversity of your area. Some of
these factors and human activities
may disturb the biodiversity
unknowingly. List these human
activities. How can these be checked?
Discuss in your class and write a
brief report in your notebook.
5.5  Flora and Fauna
As the children walk around the
biosphere reserve they appreciate thegreen wealth of the forest. They are
very happy to see tall teak trees and
animals inside the forest. Suddenly,
Paheli finds a rabbit and wants to
catch it. She starts running after it.
Professor Ahmad stops her . He
explains that animals are comfortable
and happy in their own habitat. W e
should not disturb them. Madhavji
explains that some animals and plants
typically belong to a particular area.
The plants and animals found in a
particular area are termed flora  and
fauna  respectively  of that area.
Sal, teak, mango, jamun , silver ferns, arjun,  etc., are the flora and chinkara , blue-
bull, barking deer , cheetal , leopar d, wild dog, wolf, etc. ar e examples of the fauna
of the Pachmarhi Biosphere Reserve (Fig. 5.2).
(a) (b) (c)
Rationalised-2023-24
CONSER VATION OF PLANTS AND ANIMALS 57
I have heard that some of the
endemic species may vanish.
Is it true?Activity 5.5
Try to identify the flora and fauna
of your area and list them.
5.6Endemic Species
Soon the group quietly enters the deep
forest. Children are surprised to see a
very big squirrel. This squirrel has a big
fluffy tail. They are very curious to know
about it. Madhavji tells them that this
is known as the giant squirrel and is
endemic to this area.
Endemic species  are those species
of plants and animals which are found
exclusively in a particular area. They are
not naturally found  anywhere else. A
particular type of animal or plant may
be endemic to a zone, a state or a country.
Madhavji shows sal  and wild mango
(Fig. 5.3 (a)] as two examples of the
Fig. 5.3 (a) : Wild Mango
Fig. 5.3 (b) :  Giant squirrelendemic flora of the Pachmarhi
Biosphere Reserve. Bison, Indian giant
squirrel [Fig. 5.3 (b)] and flying squirrel
are endemic fauna of this area. Professor
Ahmad explains that the destruction of
their habitat,  increasing population and
introduction of new species may affect
the natural habitat of endemic species
and endanger their existence.
Species  is a group of population
which are capable of interbreeding.
This means that the members of a
species can reproduce fertile offspring
only with the members of their own
species and not with members of
other species. Members of a species
have common characteristics.
Activity 5.6
Find out the endemic plants and
animals of the region where you live.
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 585.7 Wildlife Sanctuary
Soon Paheli sees a board with ‘Pachmarhi
Wildlife Sanctuary’ written on it.
Professor Ahmad explains that killing
(poaching) or capturing animals in general
is strictly prohibited and punishable
by law in all such places. Wildlife
Sanctuaries  like reserve forests provide
protection and suitable living conditions
to wild animals. He also tells them that
people living in wildlife sanctuaries are
allowed to do certain activities such as
grazing by their livestock, collecting
medicinal plants, firewood, etc.instead of  their natural habitat? In
your opinion, will the animals be
comfortable in a zoo or in their
natural habitat?
5.8  National Park
On the roadside there was another
board on which was written ‘Satpura
National Park’.
Children are now eager to go there.
Madhavji tells them that these reserves
are large and diverse enough to protect
whole sets of ecosystems. They preserve
flora, fauna, landscape and historic
objects of an area. Satpura National
Park is the first Reserve Forest of India.
The finest Indian teak is found in this
forest.  There are more than one hundred
National Parks i n India.
 It is a pity that even protected forests
are not safe because people living in the
neighbourhood encroach upon them
and destroy them.
Children are reminded of their visit
to the zoo. They recall that zoos are also
places where animals receive protection.Some of the threatened wild animals
like black buck, white eyed buck,
elephant, golden cat, pink headed
duck, gharial, marsh crocodile,
python, rhinoceros, etc., are
protected and preserved in our wild
life sanctuaries. Indian sanctuaries
have unique landscapes—broad level
forests, mountain forests and bush
lands in deltas of big rivers.
Activity 5.7
Visit a nearby zoo. Observe the
conditions provided to the animals.
Were they suitable for the animals?
Can animals live in artificial settingRock shelters are also found inside
the Satpura National Park. These are
evidences of prehistoric human life
in these jungles. These give us an
idea of the life of primitive people.
Rock paintings are found in these
shelters. A total of 55 rock shelters
have been identified in Pachmarhi
Biosphere Reserve.
Figures of animals and men
fighting, hunting, dancing and
playing musical instruments are
depicted in these paintings. Many
tribals still live in the area.
As children move ahead, they see a
boar d with ‘Satpura T iger Reserve’
written on it. Madhavji explains that
Project Tiger  was launched by the
government to protect the tigers in the
country. The objective of this project
was to ensure the survival and
maintenance of the tiger population in
the country.What is the difference between
a zoo and a wildlife sanctuary?
Rationalised-2023-24
CONSER VATION OF PLANTS AND ANIMALS 59Are tigers still found in this
forest? I hope I can see a tiger!
Tiger (Fig. 5.4) is one of the many
species which are slowly disappearing
from our for ests. But, the Satpura T iger
Reserve is unique in the sense that a
significant increase in the population of
tigers has been seen here. Once upon a
time, animals like lions, elephants, wild
animals has become difficult because of
disturbances in their natural habitat.
Professor Ahmad tells them that in order
to protect plants and animals strict rules
are imposed in all National Parks.
Human activities such as grazing,
poaching, hunting, capturing of animals
Fig. 5.4 :  Tiger
buffaloes (Fig. 5 .5) and barasingha
(Fig. 5.6) were also found in the Satpura
National Park. Animals whose numbers
are diminishing to a level that they might
face extinction are known as the
endangered animals . Boojho is
reminded of the dinosaurs which became
extinct a long time ago. Survival of some
Fig. 5.5 :  Wild buffaloFig. 5.6 :  Barasingha
Are only big animals
facing extinction?
Madhavji tells Paheli that small
animals are much more in danger of
becoming extinct than the bigger
animals. At times, we kill snakes, frogs,
lizards, bats and owls ruthlessly without
realising their importance in the
ecosystem. By killing them we are
harming ourselves. They might be small
in size but their role in the ecosystem
cannot be ignored. They form part of
food chains and food webs.
An ecosystem  is made of all the
plants, animals and microorganisms in
an area along with non-living
components such as climate, soil,
river deltas etc.or collection of firewood,
mdicinal plants, etc. are
not allowed
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 605.9Red Data Book
Professor  Ahmad explains about Red
Data Book to the children. He tells
them that Red Data Book  is the
source book which keeps a record of
all the endangered animals and
plants. Red  Data Book is maintained
internationally by an organisation .
India also maintains Red Data Book
for plants and animal s found
in India.
5.10  Migration
The excursion party then enters deeper
into the forest under the guidance of
Madhavji. They sit near the Tawa
What would happen if we
had no wood? Is there
any alternative
available to wood?
I know that paper is one
of the important products
we get from forests.
I wonder whether
there are any alternatives
available for paper!Is there any permanent
solution to the problem
of deforestation?Reservoir to relax for some time. Paheli
observes some of the birds near the
river. Madhavji tells the childr en that
these are migratory birds. These birds
have flown here from other parts of
the world.
Migratory birds fly to far away areas
every year during a particular time
because of climatic changes. They fly
for laying eggs as the weather in their
natural habitat becomes very cold and
inhospitable. Birds who cover long
distances to reach another land are
known as migratory birds.
5.11  Recycling of Paper
Professor  Ahmad draws attention of
the children to another cause of
deforestation. He tells them that it
takes 17 full grown trees to make one
tonne of paper . Ther efore, we should
save paper . Professor  Ahmad also tells
that paper can be recycled five to seven
times for use. If each student saves at
least one sheet of paper in a day, we
can save many tr ees in a year . We
should save, reuse used paper and
recycle it. By this we not only save
trees but also save  energy and water
needed for manufacturing paper .
Moreover , the amount of har mful
chemicals used in paper making will
also be reduced.I wonder if there is
any record of all
endangered species!
Rationalised-2023-24
CONSER VATION OF PLANTS AND ANIMALS 615.12  Reforestation
Professor Ahmad suggests that the
answer to deforestation is reforestation.
Reforestation is restocking of the
destroyed forests by planting new trees.
The planted trees should generally be
of the same species which were found
in that for est. W e should plant at least
as many trees as we cut. Reforestation
can take place naturally also. If the
deforested area is left undisturbed, it re-
establishes itself. In natural reforestation
there is no r ole of human beings. W e
have already caused tremendous
damage to our forests. If we have toretain our green wealth for future
generations, plantation of more trees is
the only option.
Professor Ahmad told them that in
India we have the Forest (Conservation)
Act. This act is aimed at preservation
and conservation of natural forests and
meeting the basic needs of the people
living in or near the forests.
After some rest Madhavji asks the
children to start heading back because
it is not advisable to stay in the
jungle after sunset. On getting back,
Professor Ahmad and the children
thank Madhavji for guiding them
through this exciting experience.
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 62
 WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT
ÜWildlife sanctuary, national park and bio-
sphere reserve are names given to the areas
meant for conservation and preservation of
forest and wild animals.
ÜBiodiversity refers to the variety of living
organisms in a specific area.
ÜPlants and animals of a particular area are
known as the flora and  fauna of  that area.
ÜEndemic species are found only in a particular
area.
ÜEndangered species are those which are facing
the danger of extinction.
ÜRed Data Book contains a record of
endangered species.
ÜMigration is the phenomenon of movement of
a species from its own habitat to some other
habitat for a particular time period every year
for a specific purpose like breeding.
ÜWe should save, r euse and r ecycle paper to
save trees, ener gy and water .
ÜReforestation is the restocking of destroyed
forests by planting new trees.
Exercises
  1.Fill in the blanks.
(a)A place where animals are protected in their natural habitat is
called .
(b)Species found only in a particular area is known as .
(c)Migratory birds fly to far away places because of  changes.
  2.Differentiate between the following.
(a)Wildlife sanctuary and biosphere reserve
(b)Zoo and wildlife sanctuary
(c)Endangered and extinct species
(d)Flora and fauna KEYWORDS KEYWORDS KEYWORDS KEYWORDS KEYWORDS
BIODIVERSITY
BIOSPHERE RESERVE
DEFOREST ATION
DESER TIFICA TION
ECOSYSTEM
ENDANGERED
SPECIES
ENDEMIC SPECIES
EXTINCT
FAUNA
FLORA
MIGRA TORY BIRDS
NATIONAL PARK
RED DA TA BOOK
REFOREST ATION
SANCTUARY
Rationalised-2023-24
CONSER VATION OF PLANTS AND ANIMALS 63  3.Discuss the effects of deforestation on the following.
(a)Wild animals
(b)Environment
(c)Villages (Rural areas)
(d)Cities (Urban areas)
(e)Earth
(f)The next generation
  4.What will happen if.
(a)we go on cutting trees.
(b)the habitat of an animal is disturbed.
(c)the top layer of soil is exposed.
  5.Answer in brief.
(a)Why should we conserve biodiversity?
(b)Protected forests are also not completely safe for wild animals. Why?
(c)Some tribals depend on the jungle. How?
(d)What are the causes and consequences of deforestation?
(e)What is Red Data Book?
(f)What do you understand by the term migration?
  6.In order to meet the ever -increasing demand in factories and for shelter ,
trees are being continually cut. Is it justified to cut trees for such projects?
Discuss and prepare a brief report.
  7.How can you contribute to the maintenance of green wealth of your locality?
Make a list of actions to be taken by you.
  8.Explain how deforestation leads to reduced rainfall.
  9.Find out about national parks in your state. Identify and show their location
on the outline map of India.
10.Why should paper be saved?  Prepare a list of ways by which you can save
paper .E X E R C I S E S
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 64
E X E R C I S E S11.Complete the word puzzle.
Down
1.Species on the verge of extinction.
2.A book carrying information about endangered species.
5.Consequence of deforestation.
Across
1.Species which have vanished.
3.Species found only in a particular habitat.
4.Variety of plants, animals and micr oorganisms found in an ar ea.
Extended Learning - Activities and Projects
1.Plant at least five different plants in your locality during this
academic year and ensure their maintenance till they grow.
2.Promise yourself that this year you will gift at least 5 plants to your
friends and relatives on their achievements, or on occasions like
birthdays. Ask your friends to take proper care of these plants and
encourage them to gift plants to their friends on such occasions. At
the end of the year count the plants that have been gifted through
this chain.
Rationalised-2023-24
CONSER VATION OF PLANTS AND ANIMALS 65Did Y ou Know?
1.India has more than half of the world’s wild tigers, 65% of the Asian
elephants, 85% of the great one-horned rhinoceros and 100% of the
Asian lions.
2.India is sixth on a list of 12 mega-biodiversity countries in the world. It
contains two of the 34 biodiversity hotspots of the world – Eastern
Himalayas and the W ester n Ghats. These ar eas ar e very rich in
biodiversity.
3.One of the most important factors that threatens wildlife today is habitat
destruction due to encroachment.
4.India contains 172 species  of animals considered globally threatened
or 2.9% of the world’s total number of threatened  species. Eastern
Himalayas hotspot has merely 163 globally threatened species
including several animal and plant species. India contains globally
important population of some of Asia’s rarest animals such as the
Bengal fox , Marbled cat , Asiatic lion, Indian elephant, Asiatic wild ass,
Indian r hinocer os, gaur, Wild asiatic water buf falo, etc.
For knowing more, you may contact:
lMinistry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Govt. of India
Environment, Forest and Wildlife Department
Indira Paryavaran Bhavan, Jor Bagh Road, New Delhi -110003
Website: http: //envfor .nic.in3.Is it justified to prevent tribals from staying in the core area of the
forest? Discuss the matter in your class and note down the points for
and against the motion in your notebook.
4.Study the biodiversity of a park nearby. Prepare a detailed report with
photographs and sketches of the flora and fauna.
5.Make a list of the new infor mation you have gather ed from this chapter .
Which information did you find the most interesting and why?
6.Make a list of various uses of papers. Observe currency notes carefully.
Do you find any difference between a currency paper and paper of your
notebook? Find out where currency paper is made.
7.Karnataka Government had launched ‘Project Elephant’ to save Asian
elephants in the state. Find out about this and other such campaigns
launched to protect threatened species.
Rationalised-2023-24
