REPRODUCTION  IN ANIMALS REPRODUCTION  IN ANIMALS
Do you recall the processes of
digestion, circulation and
respiration which you have
studied in your previous classes? These
processes are essential for the survival
of every individual. Y ou have also lear nt
about the process of reproduction in
plants. Reproduction is essential for the
continuation of a species. Imagine what
would have happened if organisms had
not r eproduced. Y ou will r ealise that
reproduction is very important as it
ensures the continuation of similar
kinds of individuals, generation after
generation.
You have alr eady lear nt in your
previous class about reproduction in
plants. In this chapter , we shall lear n
how reproduction takes place in
animals.
6.1 Modes of Reproduction
Have you seen the young ones
of dif ferent animals? T ry to name some
of the young ones by completing
Table 6.1 shown in examples at S. No.
1 and 5.
You must have seen the young
ones of various animals being born.
Can you tell how chicks and
caterpillars are born? How are kittens
and puppies born? Do you think that
these young ones looked the same
before they were born as they do now?
Let us find out.Just as in plants, there are two modes
by which animals reproduce. These are:
(i)Sexual reproduction, and
(ii)Asexual reproduction.
6.2 Sexual Reproduction
Try to r ecall r eproduction in plants
which you studied in Class VII. Y ou will
remember that plants that reproduce
sexually have male and female
reproductive parts. Can you name these
parts? In animals also, males and
females have different reproductive parts
or organs. Like plants, the reproductive
parts in animals also produce gametes
that fuse to form a zygote. It is the zygote
which develops into a new individual.
This type of reproduction beginning
from the fusion of male and female
gametes is called sexual reproduction .
Let us find out the reproductive partsTable 6.1
S. No. Animal Young one
1. Human Baby
2. Cat
3. Dog
4. Butterfly
5. Hen Chick
6. Cow
7. Frog
Rationalised-2023-24
in humans and study the process of
reproduction in them.
Male Reproductive Organs
The male reproductive organs include a
pair of testes (singular , testis), two sper m
ducts and a penis (Fig. 6.1). The testes
produce the male gametes called
sperms . Millions of sperms are produced
by the testes. Look at Fig. 6.2 which
shows the picture of a sperm. Though
sperms are very small in size, each has
a head, a middle piece and a tail. Does
it appear to be a single cell? Indeed, eachsperm is a single cell with all the usual
cell components.
Fig. 6.1: Male reproductive
organs in humansWhat purpose does the
tail in a sperm serve?
Fig. 6.3 : Female reproductive organs in
humansFemale Reproductive Organs
The female reproductive organs are a pair
of ovaries, oviducts (fallopian tubes) and
the uterus (Fig. 6.3). The ovary produces
Oviduct
Ovary
Uterus
Head
Middle piece
Tail
Fig. 6.2 :  Human sperm
REPRODUCTION  IN ANIMALS 67
Sperm
duct
TestisPenis
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 68Boojho recalls that the size
of eggs in animals varies.
The egg may be very small
as in humans, much larger
as in hens. Ostrich egg is
the largest!
Fertilisation
The first step in the process of
reproduction is the fusion of a sperm
and an ovum. When sperms come in
contact with an egg, one of the sperms
may fuse with the egg. Such fusion of
the egg and the sperm is called
fertilisation (Fig. 6.5). During
fertilisation, the nuclei of the sperm and
the egg fuse to form a single nucleus.
This results in the formation of a
fertilised egg or zygote (Fig. 6.6). Did
Fig. 6.5 :  Fertilisation
Fig. 6.4 :  Human OvumNucleusSperms
Ovum
Fusing
nuclei
The process of fertilisation is the
meeting of an egg cell from the mother
and a sper m cell fr om the father . So,
the new individual inherits some
characteristics  from the mother and
some fr om the father . Look at your
brother or sister . See if you can r ecognise
some characters in them similar to those
of your mother or your father .
Fertilisation which takes place inside
the female body is called internal
fertilisation . Internal fertilisation
occurs in many animals including
humans, cows, dogs and hens.Fig. 6.6 :  Zygotefemale gametes called ova (eggs)
(Fig. 6.4). In human beings, a single
matured egg is released into the oviduct
by one of the ovaries every month.
Uterus is the part where development of
the baby takes place. Like the sperm,
an egg is also a single cell.
you know that the zygote is the
beginning of a new individual?
Rationalised-2023-24
REPRODUCTION  IN ANIMALS 69Why do fish and
frogs lay eggs in
hundreds whereas a
hen lays only one
egg at a time?
Have you heard of
test tube babies?
Boojho and Paheli’s teacher once told
them in the class that in some women
oviducts are blocked. These women
are unable to bear babies because
sperms cannot reach the egg for
fertilisation. In such cases, doctors
collect freshly released egg and
sperms and keep them together for a
few hours for IVF or in vitro
fertilisation  (fertilisation outside the
body). In case fertilisation occurs,
the zygote is allowed to develop for
about a week and then it is placed in
the mother’s uterus. Complete
development takes place in the uterus
and the baby is born like any other
baby. Babies born through this
technique are called test-tube
babies . This term is actually
misleading because babies cannot
grow in test tubes.female lays hundreds of eggs. Unlike
hen’s egg, frog’s egg is not covered by a
shell and it is comparatively very
delicate. A layer of jelly holds the eggs
together and provides protection to the
eggs (Fig. 6.7).
You will be surprised to know that
in many animals fertili sation takes
place outside the body of the female.
In these animals, fertili sation takes
place in water . Let us find out how
this happens.
Activity 6.1
Visit some ponds or slow-flowing
streams during spring or rainy
season. Look out for clusters of
frog’s eggs floating in water .
Write down the colour and size of
the eggs.
During spring or rainy season, frogs
and toads move to ponds and slow-
flowing streams. When the male and
female come together in water , theAs the eggs are laid, the male
deposits sperms over them. Each
sperm swims randomly in water with
the help of its long tail. The sperms
come in contact with the eggs. This
results in fertili sation. This type of
fertilis ation in which the fusion of a
male and a female gamete takes place
outside the body of the female is called
external fertili sation . It is very
common in aquatic animals such as
fish, star fish
, etc.
Fig. 6.7 :  Eggs of frog
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 70
Development of Embryo
Fertilisation results in the formation of
zygote which begins to develop into an
embryo [Fig. 6.8(a)]. The zygote divides
repeatedly to give rise to a ball of cells
[Fig. 6.8(b)]. The cells then begin to form
groups that develop into different tissues
and organs of the body. This developing
structure is termed an embryo . The
embryo gets embedded in the wall of the
uterus for further development
[Fig. 6.8(c)].
The embryo continues to develop in
the uterus. It gradually develops body
Fig. 6.8 : (a) Zygote formation and development of an embryo from the zygote; (b) Ball of cells
(enlarged); (c) Embedding of the embryo in the uterus (enlarged)How could a single cell
become such a big
individual?
(b)
(a)
(c)Uterus
Embedding
embryoOvary
OvulationZygote
Uterus
wall
Developing
embryo
Though these animals lay
hundreds of eggs and release
millions of sperms, all the eggs
do not get fertilised and develop
into new individuals.
This is because the eggs and
sperms get exposed to  water
movement, wind and rainfall.
Also, there are other animals in
the pond which may feed
on eggs. Thus, production
of large number of eggs and
sperms is necessary to
ensure fertilisation
of at least
a few of them.
Rationalised-2023-24
REPRODUCTION  IN ANIMALS 71parts such as hands, legs, head, eyes,
ears etc. The stage of the embryo in
which all the body parts can be
identified is called a foetus (Fig. 6.9).
When the development of the foetus is
complete,  the mother gives birth to
the baby.place inside the egg shell during this
period? After the chick is completely
developed it bursts open the egg shell.
In animals which undergo external
fertilisation, development of the embryo
takes place outside the female body. The
embryos continue to grow within their
egg coverings. After the embryos develop,
the eggs hatch. Y
ou must have seen
numerous tadpoles swimming in ponds
and streams.
Viviparous and Oviparous Animals
We have learnt that some animals give
birth to young ones while some animals
lay eggs which later develop into young
ones. The animals which give birth to
young ones are called viviparous
animals. Those animals which lay eggs
are called oviparous animals. The
following activity will help you
understand better and differentiate
between viviparous and oviparous
animals.
Activity 6.2
Try to observe eggs of the following
organisms – fr og, lizar d, butter fly
or moth, hen and crow or any other
bir
d. Were you able to observe eggs
of all of them? Make drawings of  the
eggs that you have observed.
The eggs of a few animals are easy
to observe because their mothers lay
them outside their bodies. These are
examples of oviparous animals. But you
would not be able to collect the eggs of
a dog, cow or cat. This is because they
do not lay eggs. The mother gives birth
to the young ones. These are examples
of viviparous animals.Internal fertilisation takes place in
hens also. But, do hens give birth to
babies like human beings and cows? Y ou
know that they do not. Then, how are
chicks born? Let us find out.
Soon after fertilisation, the zygote
divides repeatedly and travels down the
oviduct. As it travels down, many
protective layers are formed around it.
The hard shell that you see in a hen’s
egg is one such pr otective layer .
After the hard shell is formed around
the developing embryo, the hen finally
lays the egg. The embryo takes about 3
weeks to develop into a chick. Y ou must
have seen the hen sitting on the eggs to
provide sufficient warmth. Did you know
that development of the chick takesFig. 6.9 :  Foetus in the uterusUterus
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 72Can you now give some more
examples of viviparous and oviparous
animals?
Young Ones to Adults
The new individuals which are born or
hatched from the eggs continue to grow
till they become adults. In some
animals, the young ones may look very
different from the adults. The life cycle
of frog is shown in Fig. 6.10.
Observe the different stages of frog
starting from the egg to the adult stage.
We find that ther e are thr ee distinct
stages, that is, egg → tadpole (larva) →
adult. Don’t the tadpoles look so
different from the adults? Can you
imagine that these tadpoles would some
day become frogs?The tadpoles transform into adults
capable of jumping and swimming. The
transformation of the larva into an adult
through drastic changes is called
metamorphosis . What about the
changes that we observe in our body as
we grow? Do you think we too undergo
metamorphosis? In human beings,
body parts similar to those present in
the adults are present from the time
of birth.
6.3 Asexual Reproduction
So far , we have lear nt about r eproduction
in some familiar animals. But what
about very small animals like hydra and
microscopic organisms like amoeba? Do
you know how they reproduce? Let us
find out.
Fig. 6.10 :  Life cycle of frog
(a) Eggs(b) Early tadpole
(c) Late tadpole
(d) Adult frog
Rationalised-2023-24
REPRODUCTION  IN ANIMALS 73
Activity 6.3
Get permanent slides of
hydra.  Observe them using
hand lens or a microscope.
Look out for any bulges
from the parent body.
Count the number of
bulges that you see in
different slides. Also, note
the size of the bulges. Draw
the diagram of hydra, as
you see it. Compare it with
the Fig. 6.11.Fig. 6.11 :  Budding in Hydra
Fig. 6.12 :  Binary fission in Amoeba(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)Dividing nucleus
Daughter amoebaeIn each hydra, there may be one or
more  bulges. These bulges are the
developing new individuals and they are
called buds. Recall the presence of buds
in yeast. In hydra too the new individuals
develop as outgrowths from a single
parent. This type of reproduction in
which only a single parent is involved is
called asexual reproduction . Since new
individuals develop from the buds in
hydra, this type of asexual reproduction
is called budding .
Another method of asexual
reproduction is observed in the
microscopic organism, amoeba. Let us
see how this happens.
You have alr eady lear nt about the
structur e of amoeba. Y ou will r ecall that
amoeba is a single-celled organism
[Fig. 6.12(a)]. It begins the process of
reproduction by the division of its
nucleus into two nuclei [Fig. 6.12(b)].
This is followed by division of its body
into two, each part receiving a nucleus
[Fig. 6.12(c)]. Finally, two amoebae are
produced from one parent amoeba
[Fig. 6.12(d)]. This type of asexual
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 74Story of Dolly, the Clone
Cloning is the production of an exact copy of a cell, any other living part, or a
complete organism. Cloning of an animal was successfully performed for the first
time by Ian Wilmut and his colleagues at the Roslin Institute in Edinburgh,
Scotland. They successfully cloned a sheep named Dolly [Fig. 6.13 (c)]. Dolly was
born on 5th July 1996 and was the first mammal to be cloned.
(a) Finn Dorsett sheep (b) Scottish blackface ewe (c) Dolly
Fig. 6.13
During the process of cloning Dolly, a cell was collected from the mammary gland
of a female Finn Dorsett sheep [Fig. 6.13 (a)]. Simultaneously, an egg was obtained
from a Scottish blackface ewe [Fig. 6.13 (b)]. The nucleus was removed from the
egg. Then, the nucleus of the mammary gland cell from the Finn Dorsett sheep
was inserted into the egg of the Scottish blackface ewe whose nucleus had been
removed. The egg thus produced was implanted into the Scottish blackface ewe.
Development of this egg followed normally and finally Dolly was born. Though
Dolly was given birth by the Scottish blackface ewe, it was found to be absolutely
identical to the Finn Dorsett sheep from which the nucleus was taken. Since the
nucleus from the egg of the Scottish blackface ewe was removed, Dolly did not
show any character of the Scottish blackface ewe. Dolly was a healthy clone of
the Finn Dorsett sheep and produced several offspring of her own through normal
sexual means. Unfortunately, Dolly died on 14th February 2003 due to a certain
lung disease.
Since Dolly, several attempts have been made to produce cloned mammals.
However , many die befor e birth or die soon after birth. The cloned animals ar e
many-a-times found to be born with severe abnormalities.
reproduction in which an animal
reproduces by dividing into two
individuals is called binary fission .
Apart from budding and binary fission,there are other methods by which a
single parent reproduces young ones.
You will study about these in your
higher classes.
Rationalised-2023-24
REPRODUCTION  IN ANIMALS 75
 KEYWORDS KEYWORDS KEYWORDS KEYWORDS KEYWORDS
ASEXUAL
REPRODUCTION
BINARY FISSION
BUDDING
EGGS
EMBRYO
EXTERNAL
FERTILISA TION
FERTILISA TION
FOETUS
INTERNAL
FERTILISA TION
METAMORPHOSIS
OVIPAROUS ANIMALS
SEXUAL
REPRODUCTION
SPERMS
VIVIP AROUS ANIMALS
ZYGOTE WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT
ÜThere are two modes by which animals repro-
duce. These are: (i) Sexual reproduction, and
(ii) Asexual reproduction.
ÜReproduction resulting from the fusion of male
and  female gametes is called sexual
reproduction.
ÜThe reproductive organs in the female include
ovaries, oviducts and uterus.
ÜThe reproductive organs in male include
testes, sperm ducts and penis.
ÜThe ovary produces female gametes called ova
and the testes produce male gametes called
sperms.
ÜThe fusion of ovum and sperm is called fertilisation.
The fertilised egg is called a zygote.
ÜFertilisation that takes place inside the female
body is called internal fertilisation. This is
observed in human beings and other animals
such as hens, cows and dogs.
ÜFertilisation that takes place outside the
female body is called external fertilisation. This
is observed in frogs, fish, starfish, etc.
ÜThe zygote divides repeatedly to give rise to an
embryo.
ÜThe embryo gets embedded in the wall of the
uterus for further development.
ÜThe stage of the embryo in which all the body
parts are identifiable is called foetus.
ÜAnimals such as human beings, cows and
dogs which give birth to young ones are called
viviparous animals.
ÜAnimals such as hen, frog, lizard  and butterfly
which lay eggs are called oviparous animals.
ÜThe transformation of the larva into adult
through drastic changes is called
metamorphosis.
ÜThe type of reproduction in which only a single
parent is involved is called asexual
reproduction.
ÜIn hydra, new individuals develop from buds.
This method of asexual reproduction is called
budding.
ÜAmoeba  reproduces by dividing itself into two.
This type of asexual reproduction is called
binary fission.
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 76Exercises
1.Explain the importance of reproduction in organisms.
2.Describe the process of fertilisation in human beings.
3.Choose the most appr opriate answer .
(a)Internal fertilisation occurs
(i)in female body.
(ii)outside female body.
(iii)in male body.
(iv)outside male body.
(b)A tadpole develops into an adult frog by the process of
(i)    fertilisation    (ii) metamorphosis    (iii) embedding    (iv) budding
(c)The number of nuclei present in a zygote is
(i) none (ii) one (iii) two (iv) four
4.Indicate whether the following statements are True (T) or False (F).
(a)Oviparous animals give birth to young ones. (    )
(b)Each sperm is a single cell. (    )
(c)External fertilisation takes place in frog. (    )
(d)A new human individual develops from a cell called gamete. (    )
(e)Egg laid after fertilisation is made up of a single cell. (    )
(f)Amoeba reproduces by budding. (    )
(g)Fertilisation is necessary even in asexual reproduction. (    )
(h)Binary fission is a method of asexual reproduction. (    )
(i)A zygote is formed as a result of fertilisation. (    )
(j)An embryo is made up of a single cell. (    )
5.Give two differences between a zygote and a foetus.
6.Define asexual reproduction. Describe two methods of asexual reproduction
in animals.
7.In which female reproductive organ does the embryo get embedded?
8.What is metamorphosis? Give examples.
9.Differentiate between internal fertilisation and external fertilisation.
Rationalised-2023-24
REPRODUCTION  IN ANIMALS 77E X E R C I S E S10.Complete the crossword puzzle using the hints given below.
Across
1.The process of the fusion of the gametes.
6.The type of fertilisation in hen.
7.The term used for bulges observed on the sides of the body of hydra.
8.Eggs are produced here.
Down
2.Sperms are produced in these male reproductive organs.
3.Another term for in vitro fertilisation.
4.These animals lay eggs.
5.A type of fission in amoeba.
Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1.Visit a poultry farm. Talk to the manager of the farm and try to find
out the answers to the following.
(a)What are layers and broilers  in a poultry farm?
(b)Do hens lay unfertilised eggs?
(c)How can you obtain fertilised and unfertilised eggs?
(d)Are the eggs that we get in the stores fertilised or unfertilised?
(e)Can you consume fertilised eggs?
(f)Is there any difference in the nutritional value of fertilised
and unfertilised eggs?
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 782.Observe live hydra yourself and learn how they reproduce by doing
the following activity:
During the summer months collect water weeds from ponds or ditches
along with the pond water and put them in a glass jar . After a day or
so you may see several hydra clinging to the sides of the jar .
Hydra is transparent, jelly-like and with tentacles. It clings to the
jar with the base of its body. If the jar is shaken, the hydra will
contract instantly into a small blob, at the same time drawing its
tentacles in.
Now take out few hydras from the jar and put them on a watch
glass. Using a hand lens or a binocular or dissection microscope,
observe the changes that are taking place in their body. Note down
your observations.
3.The eggs we get from the market are generally the unfertilised ones.
In case you wish to observe a developing chick embryo, get a fertilised
egg from the poultry or hatchery which has been incubated for 36
hours or mor e. You may then be able to see a white  disc-like structur e
on the yolk. This is the developing embryo. Sometimes if the heart
and blood vessels have developed you may even see a red spot.
4.Talk to a doctor . Find out how twinning occurs. Look for any twins
in your neighbourhood, or among your friends. Find out  if the twins
are identical or non-identical. Also find out why identical twins are
always of the same sex? If you know of any story about twins, write
it in your own words.
For more information on animal reproduction, you can visit :
l www.saburchill.com
l www.teenshealth.org/teen/sexual-health
Did Y ou Know?
An interesting organisation is observed in a honey bee hive, a colony of several
thousand bees. Only one bee i n the colony lays eggs. This bee is called the
queen bee. All other female bees are worker bees. Their main job is to build the
hive, look after the young and feed the queen bee adequately to keep her
healthy so that she can lay eggs. A queen bee lays thousands of eggs. The
fertili sed eggs hatch into females, while the unfertili sed eggs give rise to males ,
called drones. It is the job of the worker bees to maintain the temperature of
the hive at around 35 °C to incubate the eggs.
Rationalised-2023-24
