FORCE  AND PRESSURE FORCE AND PRESSURE
In Class VII, you have learnt how
objects move. Do you recall how we
can decide whether an object is
moving faster than the other? What does
the distance moved by an object in unit
time indicate? Y ou also know that a
moving object like a ball rolling on the
ground slows down. Sometimes it may
change its direction of motion. It is also
possible that the ball may slow down
and also change its direction. Have you
ever wondered what makes an object
slow down or go faster , or change its
direction of motion?
Let us recall some of our everyday
experiences. What do you do to make
a football move? What do you do to
make a moving ball move faster? How
does a  goalkeeper stop a ball ? A
hockey player changes the direction
of the moving ball with a flick of the
stick . How do fielders stop a
 ball hitby a batsman?  (Fig. 8.1). In all these
situations the ball is either made to
move faster or slower or its direction
of motion is changed.
We often say that a for ce has been
applied on a ball when it is kicked,
pushed, thrown or flicked. What is a
force? What can it do to bodies on which
it is applied? W e shall seek answers to
such questions in this chapter .
8.1 Force – A Push or a Pull
Actions like picking, opening,
shutting, kicking, hitting, lifting,
flicking, pushing, pulling are often
used to describe certain tasks. Each
of these actions usually results in
some kind of change in the  state of
motion of an object.  Can these terms
be replaced with one or more terms?
Let us find out.
(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 8.1 : (a) A goal keeper saving a goal, (b) A hockey player flicking a ball, and
(c) A fielder stopping a ball
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 94
Activity 8.1
Table 8.1 gives some examples of familiar situations involving motion of objects.
You can add mor e such situations or r eplace those given her e. Try to identify
action involved in each case as a push and/or a pull and record your observations.
One example has been given to help you.
S.
No. Description of
the situationAction : (pushing/ pulling/picking/
hitting/lifting/ lowering/flying/
kicking/ throwing/shutting/
flicking)Action can be
grouped as a
Push
1. Moving a book
placed on a table
2. Opening or
shutting  a door
3. Drawing a bucket
of water from a
well
4. A football player
taking a penalty
kick
5. A cricket ball hit
by a batsman
6. Moving a loaded
cart
7. Opening a
drawerPushing Pulling Lifting — Yes Yes
Table 8.1 : Identifying Actions as Push or Pull
I learnt in Class VI that a
magnet attracts a piece of
iron towards it. Is attraction
also a pull? What about
repulsion between similar
poles of two magnets? Is it a
pull or a push?Do you notice that each of the actions
can be grouped as a pull or a push or
both? Can we infer from this, that to move
an object, it has to be pushed or pulled?
In science, a push or a pull on an
object is called a force . Thus, we can
say that the motion imparted to objects
was due to the action of a force. When
does a force come into play? Let us
find out.   
Pull
Rationalised-2023-24
FORCE AND PRESSURE 95Fig. 8.3 (b) : Who is pulling whom ?
8.2 Forces are due to an
Interaction
Suppose a man is standing behind a
stationary car [Fig.8.2(a)]. Will the car
move due to his presence? Suppose the
man now begins to push the car
[Fig.8.2(b)], that is, he applies a force
on it. The car  may begin to move in theFig. 8.3 shows three situations that
may be familiar to you. Can you decide
who is pulling and who is pushing in
these cases? In Fig. 8.3 (a), both the girls
appear to push each other while
Fig. 8.2 (b) :  A car being pushed by a man
Fig. 8.3  (a)  : Who is pushing whom?
direction of the applied force. Note that the
man has to push the car to make it move.Fig. 8.2(a) : A man standing behind a stationary car
Fig. 8.3 (c) :  Who is pulling whom ?
the pair of girls in Fig. 8.3 (b) are trying
to pull each other . Similarly, the cow
and the man in Fig. 8.3 (c) appear to
pull each other . The girls in the two
situations shown here are applying force
on each other . Is it also true for the man
and the cow?
From these examples, we can infer
that at least two objects must interact
for a force to come into play. Thus, an
interaction of one object with another
object results in a force between the
two objects.
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 96Does it mean that the net
force on an object is zero if the
two forces acting on it in
opposite directions are equal?
rope in their direction. Sometimes the rope
simply does not move. Is it not similar to
the situation shown in Fig. 8.3 (b)? The
team that pulls har der, that is, applies a
larger force, finally wins the game.
What do these examples suggest
about the nature of force?
Forces applied on an object 
in the
same dir ection add  to one another . Now
recall what happened when you and
your friend pushed the heavy box in the
same direction in Activity 8.2.
If the two forces act in the opposite
directions on an object, the net force acting
on it is the difference between the two
forces . What did you observe in Activity
8.2 when both of you were pushing the
heavy box from opposite directions?
Recall that in the tug-of-war when
two teams pull equally hard, the rope
does not move in any direction.
So, we learn that a force could be
larger or smaller than the other or equal
to each other . The strength of a force is
usually expr essed by its magnitude . We
have also to specify the direction in
which a force acts. Also, if the direction
or the magnitude of the applied force
changes, its effect also changes.Activity 8.2
Choose a heavy object like a table
or a box, which you can move only
by pushing har d. Try to push it all
by yourself. Can you move it? Now
ask one of your friends to help you
in pushing it in the same direction
[Fig. 8.4(a)]. Is it easier to move it
now? Can you explain why?
Now push the same object, but
ask your friend to push it from the
opposite side [Fig. 8.4 (b)]. Does the
object move? If it does, note the
direction in which it moves. Can
you guess which one of you is
applying a larger force?
Fig. 8.4 :  Two friends pushing a heavy load
(a) in the same direction, (b) in
opposite direction(a)
(b)8.3 Exploring Forces
Let us try to learn more about forces.
Fig. 8.5 : The rope may not move if the two
teams pull at it with equal force
Have you ever seen a game of tug-of
war? In this game two teams pull at a
rope in opposite directions (Fig. 8.5).
Members of both the teams try to pull the
Rationalised-2023-24
FORCE AND PRESSURE 97In general, more than one force may
be acting on an object. However , the
effect on the object is due to the net
force acting on it.
8.4 A Force can Change the
State of Motion
Let us now find out what happens when
a force acts on an object.
Activity 8.3
Take a rubber ball and place it on a
level sur face such as a table top or
a concr ete floor . Now, gently push
the ball along the level sur face
(Fig. 8.6). Does the ball begin to
move? Push the ball again while it
is still moving. Is there any change
in its speed? Does it increase or
decrease?
Next, place your palm in front
of the moving ball. Remove your
palm as soon as the moving ball
touches it. Does your palm apply a
force on the ball? What happens to
the speed of the ball now? Does it
increase or decrease? What would
happen if you let your palm hold
the moving ball?
Fig. 8.6  : A ball at rest begins to move
when a force is applied on itI have seen
children competing with one
another in moving a rubber tyre
or a ring by pushing it
(Fig. 8.7).  I now understand
why the speed of the tyre
increases whenever it is
pushed.
Fig. 8.7 : To move a tyre faster it has to be
pushed repeatedly
You might r ecall similar situations.
For example, while taking a penalty kick
in football, the player applies a force on
the ball. Before being hit, the ball was at
rest and so its speed was zero. The
applied force makes the ball move
towards the goal. Suppose, the
goalkeeper dives or jumps up to save the
goal. By his action the goalkeeper tries
to apply a force on the moving ball. The
force applied by him can stop or deflect
the ball, saving a goal being scored. If
the goalkeeper succeeds in stopping the
ball, its speed decreases to zero.
These observations suggest that a
force applied on an object may change
its speed. If the force applied on the object
is in the direction of its motion, the speed
of the object increases. If the force is
applied in the direction opposite to the
direction of motion, then it results in a
decrease in the speed of the object.
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 98Let us consider some more
examples. In a game of volleyball,
players often push the moving ball to
their team  mates to make a winning
move. Sometimes the ball is returned
to the other side of the court by
pushing or smashing it. In cricket,  a
batsman plays his or her shot by
applying a force on the ball with the
bat. Is there any change in the
direction of motion of the ball in these
cases? In all these examples the speed
and the direction of the moving ball
change due to the application of a
force. Can you give a few more
examples of this kind?
A change in either the speed of an
object, or its direction of motion, or both,
is described as a change in its state of
motion . Thus, a force may bring a
change in the state of motion of an
object.
Fig. 8.8 : (a) A ball set in motion by
pushing it along a level surface
and (b) the direction of motion
of the ball after it strikes the
ruler placed in its path(a)State of Motion
The state of motion of an object is
described by its speed and the
direction of motion. The state of rest
is considered to be the state of zero
speed. An object may be at rest or in
motion; both are its states of motion.Paheli is curious to know whether
application of a force can only change the
speed of an object. Let us find out.
Activity 8.4
Take a ball and place it on a level
surface as you did in Activity 8.3.
Make the ball move by giving it a
push [Fig. 8.8(a)]. Now place a ruler
in its path as shown in Fig. 8.8(b).
In doing so, you would apply a force
on the moving ball. Does the ball
continue to move in the same
direction after it strikes the ruler?
Repeat the activity and try to
obstruct the moving ball by placing
the ruler in such a way that it
makes different angles to its path.
In each case note your observations
about the direction of motion of the
ball after it strikes the ruler .
(b)Does it mean that the application of
a force would always result in a change
in the state of motion of the object? Let
us find out.
It is common experience that many
a time application of force does not result
in a change in the state of motion. For
example, a heavy box may not move at
all even if you apply the maximum force
that you can exert. Again, no effect of
force is observed when you try to push
a wall.
Rationalised-2023-24
FORCE AND PRESSURE 998.5 Force can Change the
Shape of an Object
Description of
SituationHow to Apply
ForceDiagram Action of Force
Change in
State of
MotionChange in
Shape
Yes No Yes No
Pressing it down
with your hands.
By sitting on the
seat.
By hanging a
weight or by
pulling its free end.
By putting a weight
at the centre of the
scale.Table 8.2 : Studying the Effect of Force on Objects
Activity 8.5
Some situations have been given in Column 1 of Table 8.2 in which
objects are not free to move.  Column 2 of the Table suggests the manner
in which a force can be applied on each object while Column 3 shows a
diagram of the action. T ry to observe the ef fect of for ce in as many
situations as possible. Y ou can also add similar situations using available
material from your environment. Note your observations in Columns 4
and 5 of the Table.
A lump of
dough on a
plate.
Spring fixed to
the seat of a
bicycle.
A rubber band
suspended from
a hook/nail
fixed on a wall.
A plastic or
metal scale
placed between
two bricks.
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 100
Fig. 8.9 : Muscular force of animals is used to
carry out many difficult tasksWhat do you conclude from the
observations noted in Table 8.2? What
happens when you apply a force on
an inflated balloon by pressing it
between your palms? What happens
to the shape of a ball of dough when it
is rolled to make a chapati ? What
happens when  you press a rubber ball
placed on a table? In all these
examples you saw that the application
of force on an object may change
its shape .
Having per formed all the above
activities, you would have realised  that
a force
lmay make an object move from rest.
lmay change the speed of an object
if it is moving.
lmay change the direction of motion
of an object.
lmay bring about a change in the
shape of an object.
lmay cause some or all of these
effects.
While a force may cause one or more
of these effects, it is important to
remember that none of these actions can
take place without the action of a force.
Thus, an object cannot move by itself,
it cannot change speed by itself, it
cannot change direction by itself and
its shape cannot change by itself.
8.6 Contact Forces
Muscular Force
Can you push or lift a book lying on a
table without touching it? Can you lift
a bucket of water without holding it?
Generally, to apply a force on an object,
your body has to be in contact with the
object. The contact may also be with thehelp of a stick or a piece of rope.  When
we push an object like a school bag or
lift a bucket of water, wher e does the
force come from? This force is caused
by the action of muscles in our body.
The force resulting due to the action of
muscles is known as the muscular
force .
It is the muscular force that enables
us to perform all activities involving
movement or bending of our body. In
Class VII you have learnt that in the
process of digestion the food gets
pushed through the alimentary canal.
Could it be a muscular force that does
it? You also know that lungs expand
and contract while we inhale and
exhale air during breathing. Where
are these muscles located which
make breathing possible? Can you list
a few more examples of the force
exerted by the muscles in our body?
Animals also make use of muscular
force to carry out their physical activities
and other tasks. Animals like bullocks,
horses, donkeys and camels are used to
perfor m various tasks for us. In
performing these tasks they use
muscular force (Fig. 8.9).
Rationalised-2023-24
FORCE AND PRESSURE 101Since muscular force can be applied
only when it is in contact with an object,
it is also called a contact force . Are there
other types of contact forces? Let us find
out.
Friction
Recall some of your experiences. A ball
rolling along the ground gradually slows
down and finally comes to rest. When
we stop pedalling a bicycle, it gradually
slows down and finally comes to a stop.
A car or a scooter also comes to rest
once its engine is switched off. Similarly,
a boat comes to rest if we stop rowing
it. Can you add some more such
experiences?
In all these situations no force
appears to be acting on the objects, yet
their speed gradually decreases and
they come to rest after some time. What
causes a change in their state of motion?
Could some force be acting on them!
Can you guess the direction in which
the force must be acting in each case?
The force responsible for changing the
state of motion of objects in all these
examples is the force of friction . It is the
force of friction between the sur face of
the ball and the ground that brings the
moving ball to rest. Similarly, friction
between water and the boat brings it to
a stop once you stop rowing.
The force of friction always acts on
all the moving objects and its direction
is always opposite to the direction of
motion. Since the force of friction arises
due to contact between sur faces, it is
also an example of a contact for ce. You
will learn more about this force in
Chapter 9.
You may be wondering whether it is
essential for the agent applying a forceon an object to be always in contact with
it. Let us find out.
8.7 Non-contact Forces
Magnetic Force
Activity 8.6
Take a pair of bar magnets. Place
the longer side of one of the magnets
over three round shaped pencils or
wooden rollers as shown in
Fig. 8.10. Now bring one end of the
other magnet near the end of the
magnet placed on the rollers. Make
sure that the two magnets do not
touch each other . Observe what
happens. Next, bring the other end
of the magnet near the same end
of the magnet placed on the rollers
(Fig.8.10). Note what happens to
the magnet placed on the rollers
every time another magnet is
brought near it.
Fig. 8.10 :  Observing attraction and repulsion
between two magnets
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 102 Fig.  8.11 : A straw rubbed with paper attracts
another straw but repels it if it has
also been rubbed with a sheet
of paper
A straw is said to have acquired
electrostatic charge after it has been
rubbed with a sheet of paper . Such a
straw is an example of a charged body.
The force exerted by a charged body
on another charged or uncharged body
is known as electrostatic force . This
force comes into play even when the
bodies are not in contact. The
electrostatic force, therefore, is another
example of a non-contact for ce. You will
learn more about electric charges in
Chapter 12.
Gravitational Force
You know that a coin or a pen falls to the
ground when it slips off your hand.
Leaves and fruits also fall to the ground
when they get detached from the plant.
Have you ever wondered why it is so?
When the coin is held in your hand it
is at rest. As soon as it is released, it
begins to move downwards. It is clear that
the state of motion of the coin undergoes
a change. Can this happen without a
force acting on it?  Which is this force?Does the magnet on the rollers begin
to move when the other magnet is brought
near it? Does it always move in the
direction of the approaching magnet?
What do these observations suggest? Does
it mean that some force must be acting
between the two magnets?
You have lear nt in Class VI that like
poles of two magnets repel each other and
unlike poles attract each other . Attraction
or repulsion between objects can also be
seen as another form of pull or push. Do
you have to bring the magnets in contact
for observing the force between them? A
magnet can exert a force on another
magnet without being in contact with it.
The force exerted by a magnet is an
example of a non-contact force .
Similarly, the force exerted by a
magnet on a piece of iron is also a
non-contact force.
Electrostatic Force
Activity 8.7
Take a plastic straw and cut it into
nearly two equal pieces. Suspend one
of the pieces from the edge of a table
with the help of a piece of thread
(Fig. 8.11). Now hold the other piece
of straw in your hand and rub its
free end with a sheet of paper . Bring
the rubbed end of the straw near the
suspended straw. Make sure that the
two pieces do not touch each other .
What do you observe?
Next, rub the free end of the
suspended piece of straw with a
sheet of paper . Again, bring the
piece of straw that was rubbed
earlier with paper near the free end
of the suspended straw. What do you
observe now?
Rationalised-2023-24
FORCE AND PRESSURE 103Objects or things fall towards the
earth because it pulls them. This force
is called the force of gravity , or just
gravity. This is an attractive force. The
force of gravity acts on all objects. The
force of gravity acts on all of us all the
time without our being awar e of it. W ater
begins to flow towards the ground as
soon as we open a tap. W ater in rivers
flows downward due to the force
of gravity.Try cutting vegetables with a blunt
knife  and then with a sharp knife. Which
is easier?
Do you get the feeling that the area
over which the force is applied (for
example, the pointed end of the nail)
plays  a role in making these tasks easier?
The force acting on a unit area of a
surface is called pr essure
.
pressure = force / area on which it acts
At this stage we consider only those
forces which act perpendicular to the
surface on which the pressure is to
be computed.Gravity is not a property of the earth
alone. In fact, every object in the
universe, whether small or large,
exerts a force on every other object.
This force is known as the
gravitational force .
8.8 Pressure
Is there any relation between pressure
and force? Let us find out.
Try to push a nail into a wooden
plank by its head. Did you succeed? T ry
now to push the nail by the pointed end
(Fig. 8.12). Could you do it this time?
I now understand why
porters place a round piece
of cloth on their heads,
when they have to carry
heavy loads (Fig. 8.13). By
doing this they increase the
area of contact of the load
with their head. So, the
pressure on their head is
reduced and they find it
easier to carry the load.
Fig. 8.13 : A porter carrying a heavy load
Fig. 8.12 : Pushing a nail into a wooden plank
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 104Note that the area is in the
denominator in the above expression.
So, the smaller the area, larger the
pressur e on a sur face for the same for ce.
The area of the pointed end of the nail
is much smaller than that of its head.
The same force, therefore, produces a
pressure sufficient to push the pointed
end of the nail into the wooden plank.
Can you explain now why shoulder
bags are provided with broad straps and
not thin strap? And, why the tools
meant for cutting and piercing always
have sharp edges?
Do liquids and gases also exert
pressure? Does it also depend on the
area on which the force acts?  Let us
find out.
8.9 Pressure Exerted by
Liquids and Gases
Activity 8.8
Take a transparent glass tube or a
plastic pipe. The length of the pipe/
tube should be about 25 cm and its
diameter should be 5-7.5 cm. Also
take a piece of thin sheet of a good
quality rubber , say, a rubber
balloon. Stretch the rubber sheet
tightly over one end of the pipe.
Hold the pipe at the middle, keeping
it in a vertical position (Fig. 8.14).
Ask one of your friends to pour some
water in the pipe. Does the rubber
sheet bulge out? Note also the
height of the water column in the
pipe. Pour some mor e water .
Observe again the bulge in the
rubber sheet and the height of the
water column in the pipe. Repeatthis process a few more times. Can
you see any relation between the
amount of the bulge in the rubber
sheet and the height of the water
column in the pipe?
Fig. 8.14 : Pressure exerted by water at the
bottom of the container depends
on the height of its column
Activity 8.9
Take a plastic bottle. Y ou can take
a discarded water or soft drink
bottle. Fix a cylindrical glass tube,
a few cm long near its bottom as
shown in Fig. 8.15. Y ou can do so
by slightly heating one end of the
glass tube and then quickly
inserting it near the bottom of the
bottle. Make sure that the water
does not leak from the joint. If there
is any leakage, seal it with molten
wax. Cover the mouth of the glass
tube with a thin rubber sheet as you
did in Activity 8.8. Now fill the bottle
upto half with water . What do you
observe? Why does the rubber sheet
Rationalised-2023-24
FORCE AND PRESSURE 105
Fig. 8.15 : A liquid exerts pressure on the walls
of the container
Note that the rubber sheet has been
fixed on the side of the container and not
at the bottom. Does the bulging of the
rubber sheet in this case indicate that water
exerts pressure on the sides of the container
as well? Let us investigate further .
Activity 8.10
Take an empty plastic bottle or a
cylindrical container . You can take
a used tin can or a used plastic
bottle. Drill four holes all around
near the bottom of the bottle. Make
sure that the holes are at the same
height from the bottom (Fig. 8.16).
Now fill the bottle with water . What
do you observe?
Do the different streams of water
coming out of the holes fall at the
same distance from the bottle? What
does this indicate?Can you now say that liquids exert
pressure on the walls of the
container ?
Do gases also exert pressure? Do
they also exert pressure on the walls of
their containers? Let us find out.fixed to the glass tube bulge this
time? Pour some more water in the
bottle. Is there any change in the
bulge of the rubber sheet?
Fig. 8.16 : Liquids exert equal pressure at the
same depth
I have seen fountains of water
coming out of the leaking joints
or holes in pipes supplying
water .  Is it not due to the
pressure exerted by water on the
walls of the pipes?
When you inflate a balloon, why do
you have to close its mouth? What
happens when you open the mouth of
an inflated balloon? Suppose you have
a balloon which has holes. W ould you
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 106
Unit area
Fig. 8.17 : Atmospheric pressure is the force of
gravity on air in a column of unit areabe able to inflate it? If not, why? Can we
say that air exerts pressure in all
directions?
Do you recall what happens to the
air in the bicycle tube when it has a
puncture? Do these observations suggest
that air exerts pressure on the inner walls
of an inflated balloon or a  tube? So, we
find that gases, too, exert pressure on
the walls of their container .
8.10 Atmospheric Pressure
You know that ther e is air all ar ound
us. This envelop of air is known as the
atmosphere . The atmospheric air
extends up to many kilometres above
the sur face of the earth. The pressure
exerted by this air is known as
atmospheric pressur e
. We know that
pressure is force per unit area. If we
imagine a unit area and a very long
cylinder standing on it filled with air ,
then the force of gravity on the air in
this cylinder is the atmospheric
pressure (Fig. 8.17).
Fig. 8.18 : A rubber sucker pressed on a
surface
When you pr ess the sucker , most of
the air between its cup and the sur face
escapes out. The sucker sticks to the
surface because the pr essure of
atmosphere acts on it. To pull the sucker
off the sur face, the applied for ce should
be large enough to overcome the
atmospheric pressure. This activity
might give you an idea about the
magnitude of atmospheric pressure. In
fact, it would not be possible for any
human being to pull the sucker off the
But, how large or small is the
atmospheric pressure? Let us get an
idea about its magnitude.
Activity 8.11
Take a good quality rubber sucker .
It looks like a small rubber cup (Fig.
8.18). Press it hard on a smooth
plane sur face. Does it stick to the
surface? Now try to pull it of f the
surface. Can you do it?
Rationalised-2023-24
FORCE AND PRESSURE 107
If the area of my head
were 15 cm × 15 cm, how
much force air will exert
on my head?
Fig. 8.19 : Pressure of atmosphere on
your headsurface if ther e wer e no air at all between
the sucker and the sur face. Does it give
you an idea how large the atmospheric
pressure is?
The force due to air in a column of
the height of the atmosphere and area
15 cm × 15 cm (Fig. 8.19) is nearly equal
to the force of gravity on an object of
mass 225 kg (2250N). The reason we
are not crushed under this force of
gravity is that the pressure inside our
bodies is also equal to the atmospheric
pressure and balances the pressure from
outside.
Did you know?
Otto von Guericke, a German scientist of the 17th century, invented a pump to
extract air out of a vessel. With the help of this pump, he demonstrated
dramatically the force of the air pressure. He joined two hollow metallic
hemispheres of 51 cm diameter each and pumped air out of them. Then he
employed eight horses on each hemisphere to pull them apart (Fig. 8.20). So
great is the force of air pressure that the hemispheres could not be pulled apart.
Fig. 8.20 :  Horses pulling the hemispheres
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 108
     KEYWORDSKEYWORDSKEYWORDSKEYWORDSKEYWORDS
ATMOSPHERIC
PRESSURE
CONTACT FORCE
ELECTROSTATIC
FORCE
FORCE
FRICTION
GRAVITATIONAL
FORCE
GRAVITY
MAGNETIC FORCE
MUSCULAR FORCE
NON-CONTACT
FORCE
PRESSURE
PULL
PUSH WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT
ÜForce could be a push or a pull.
ÜA force arises due to the interaction between
two objects.
ÜForce has magnitude as well as direction.
ÜA change in the speed of an object or the di-
rection of its motion or both implies a change
in its state of motion.
ÜForce acting on an object may cause a change
in its state of motion or a change in its shape.
ÜA force can act on an object with or without
being in contact with it.
ÜForce per unit area is called pressure.
ÜLiquids and gases exert pressure on the walls
of their containers.
ÜThe pressure exerted by air around us is
known as atmospheric pressure.
Exercises
1.Give two examples each of situations in which you push or pull to change
the state of motion of objects.
2.Give two examples of situations in which applied force causes a change in
the shape of an object.
3.Fill in the blanks in the following statements.
(a)To draw water from a well we have to __________ at the rope.
(b)A charged body __________ an uncharged body towards it.
(c)To move a loaded trolley we have to __________ it.
(d)The north pole of a magnet __________the north pole of another
magnet.
Rationalised-2023-24
FORCE AND PRESSURE 109  4.An archer stretches her bow while taking aim at the target. She then
releases the arrow, which begins to move towards the target. Based on
this information fill up the gaps in the following statements using the
following terms.
muscular , contact, non-contact, gravity, friction, shape, attraction
(a)To stretch the bow, the archer applies a force that causes a change
in its __________.
(b)The force applied by the archer to stretch the bow is an example of
__________ force.
(c)The type of force responsible for a change in the state of motion of the
arrow is an example of a __________ force.
(d)While the arrow moves towards its target, the forces acting on it are
due to __________ and that due to __________ of air .
  5.In the following situations identify the agent exerting the force and the
object on which it acts. State the effect of the force in each case.
(a)Squeezing a piece of lemon between the fingers to extract its juice.
(b)Taking out paste from a toothpaste tube.
(c)A load suspended from a spring while its other end is on a hook fixed
to a wall.
(d)An athlete making a high jump to clear the bar at a certain height.
  6.A blacksmith hammers a hot piece of iron while making a tool. How does
the force due to hammering affect the piece of iron?
  7.An inflated balloon was pressed against a wall after it has been rubbed
with a piece of synthetic cloth. It was found that the balloon sticks to the
wall. What force might be responsible for the attraction between the balloon
and the wall?
  8.Name the forces acting on a plastic bucket containing water held above
ground level in your hand. Discuss why the forces acting on the bucket do
not bring a change in its state of motion.
  9.A rocket has been fired upwards to launch a satellite in its orbit. Name
the two forces acting on the rocket immediately after leaving the launching
pad.
10.When we press the bulb of a dr opper with its nozzle kept in water , air in
the dropper is seen to escape in the form of bubbles. Once we release the
pressur e on the bulb, water gets filled in the dr opper . The rise of water in
the dropper is due to
(a)pressur e of water .
(b)gravity of the earth.
(c)shape of rubber bulb.
(d)atmospheric pressure.E X E R C I S E S
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 110Extended Lear ning — Activities and Pr ojects
1.Make a 50 cm × 50 cm bed of dry sand about 10 cm in thickness.
Make sure that its top surface is levelled. Take a wooden or a plastic
stool. Cut two strips of graph paper each with a width of 1 cm.
Paste them vertically on any leg of the stool - one at the bottom and
the other from the top.  Now gently put the stool on the sand bed
with its legs resting on the sand. Increase the size of sand bed if
required. Now put a load, say a school bag full of books, on the seat
of the stool. Mark the level of sand on the graph strip. This would
give you the depth, if any, to which the legs of stool sink in sand.
Next, turn the stool upside down so that now it rests on its seat on
the sand bed. Note the depth to which the stool sinks now. Next,
put the same load on the stool and note the depth to which it sinks
in the sand. Compare the pressure exerted by the stool in the two
situations.
2.Take a tumbler and fill it with water . Cover the mouth of the tumbler
with a thick card similar to that of a postcard. Hold the tumbler
with one hand while keeping the card pressed to its mouth with
your other hand. Turn the tumbler upside down while keeping the
card pressed to its mouth. Make sure that the tumbler is held
vertical. Gently remove the hand pressing the card. What do you
observe? Does the card get detached allowing the water to spill?
With a little practice you will find that the card continues to hold
water in the tumbler even after it is not supported by your hand.
Also try this activity by using a piece of cloth to hold the tumbler in
an upside down position (Fig. 8.21).
Fig. 8.21
Rationalised-2023-24
FORCE AND PRESSURE 111
3.Take 4-5 plastic bottles of different shapes and sizes. Join them
together with small pieces of glass or rubber tube as shown in
Fig. 8.22. Keep this arrangement on a level surface. Now pour water
in any one of the bottles. Note whether the bottle in which water is
poured gets filled first or all the bottles get filled up simultaneously.
Note the level of water in all the bottles from time to time. Try to
explain your observations.
Fig.  8.22
Rationalised-2023-24
