MICROORGANISMS  : FRIEND AND FOE MICROORGANISMS  : FRIEND AND FOE
You have seen several kinds of
plants and animals. However ,
there are other living organisms
around us which we normally cannot
see. These are called microorganisms
or microbes . For example, you might
have observed that during the rainy
season moist bread gets spoilt and its
surface gets cover ed with gr eyish white
patches. Observe these patches through
a magnifying glass. Y ou will see tiny,
black rounded structures. Do you know
what these structures are and where d o
these come from?
2.1 Microorganisms
Activity 2.1
Collect some moist soil from the
field in a beaker and add water to
it. After the soil particles have
settled  down , observe a drop of
water from the beaker under a
microscope. What do you see ?
Activity 2.2
Take a few drops of water from a
pond. Spread on a glass slide and
observe through a microscope.
Do you find tiny organisms moving
around?These observations show that water
and soil are full of tiny organisms,
though not all of them fall into the
category of microbes. These
microorganisms or microbes are so
small in size that they cannot be seen
with the unaided eye. Some of these,
such as the fungus that grows on bread,
can be seen with a magnifying glass.
Others cannot be seen without the help
of a microscope. That is why these are
called microorganisms or microbes.
Microorganisms are classified into
four major groups. These groups are
bacteria , fungi ,  protozoa  and some
algae . Some of these common
microorganisms are shown in
Figs. 2.1 - 2.4.
Viruses are also microscopic but are
different from other microorganisms .
They, however , reproduce only inside the
cells of the host organism, which may be
a bacterium, plant or animal. Some of the
viruses are shown in Fig. 2.5. Common
ailments like cold, influenza (flu) and
most coughs are caused by viruses.
Serious diseases like polio and chicken
pox are also caused by viruses.
Diseases like dysentery and malaria
are caused by protozoa(protozoans)
whereas  typhoid and tuberculosis (TB)
are bacterial diseases.
You have lear nt about some of
these microorganisms in Classes VI
and VII.
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 18Fig. 2.4 :  Fungi
Fig. 2.1:  Bacteria
Chlamydomonas Spirogyra
Fig. 2.2 :  AlgaeAmoeba
Paramecium
Fig. 2.3 :  Protozoa
Bread mould PenicilliumAspergillus
Rationalised-2023-24
MICROORGANISMS  : FRIEND AND FOE 192.2Where do Microorganisms
Live?
Microorganisms may be single-celled
like bacteria, some algae and protozoa,
or multicellular , such as many algae and
fungi. They live in all types of
environment, ranging from ice cold
climate to hot springs; and deserts to
marshy lands. They are also found
inside the bodies of animals including
humans. Some microorganisms
grow on other organisms while others
exist freely.
2.3 Microorganisms and Us
Microorganisms play an important role
in our lives. Some of them are beneficial
in many ways whereas some others are
harmful and cause diseases. Let us
study about them in detail.Microorganisms have been used for
the production of alcohol since ages.Friendly Microorganisms
Microorganisms are used for various
purposes. They are used in the
preparation of curd, bread and cake.
Curd contains several micro-
organisms. Of these, the bacterium ,
Lactobacillus   promotes the formation
of curd. It multiplies in milk and
converts it into curd. Bacteria are also
involved in the making of cheese,
pickles and many other food items. An
important ingredient of rava (sooji)
idlis and 
bhaturas  is curd. Can you
guess why? Bacteria and yeast are also
helpful for fermentation of rice idlis
and dosa batter .
Fig. 2.5 :  Viruses
I saw that my mother
added a little curd to warm
milk to set curd for the
next day. I wonder why?They are also used in cleaning up
of the environment. For example, the
organic wastes (vegetable peels, remains
of animals,  faeces , etc.) are broken
down into harmless and usable
substances by bacteria. Recall that
bacteria are also used in the
preparation of medicines. In agriculture
they are used to increase soil fertility
by fixing nitrogen.
Making of Curd and Bread
You have lear nt in Class VII that milk is
turned into curd by bacteria.
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 20spoon of yeast powder to the sugar
solution. Keep it covered in a warm
place for 4-5 hours. Now smell the
solution.  Can you get a smell?
Louis Pasteur
discovered
fermentation
in 1857.
In 1929, Alexander
Fleming was working
on a culture of disease-
causing bacteria.
Suddenly he found the
spores of a little green mould in one of
his culture plates. He observed that
the presence of mould prevented the
growth of bacteria. In fact, it also killed
many of these bacteria. From this the
mould penicillin was prepared.
This is the smell of alcohol as sugar
has been converted into alcohol by yeast.
This process of conversion of sugar into
alcohol is known as fermentation.Activity 2.3
Take ½ kg flour ( atta or maida ),
add some sugar and mix with
warm water . Add a small amount
of yeast powder and knead to
make a soft dough. What do you
observe after two hours? Did you
find the dough rising?
Maida with yeast powder
Raised maida
Fig. 2.6
Yeast r eproduces rapidly and
produces carbon dioxide during
respiration. Bubbles of the gas fill the
dough and increase its volume (Fig. 2.6).
This is the basis of the use of  yeast in
the baking industry for making breads,
pastries and cakes.
Commercial Use of Microorganisms
Microorganisms are used for the large scale
production of alcohol, wine and acetic acid
(vinegar). Y east is used for commer cial
production of alcohol and wine. For this
purpose yeast is grown on natural sugars
present in grains like barley, wheat, rice,
crushed fruit juices , etc.
Activity 2.4
Take a 500 mL beaker filled upto
¾ with water . Dissolve 2-3
teaspoons of sugar in it. Add half a
Medicinal Use of Microorganisms
When ever you fall ill the doctor may
give you some antibiotic tablets,
capsules or injections such as of
penicillin. The source of these
medicines is microorganisms. These
medicines kill or stop the growth of the
disease -causing microorganisms. Such
medicines are called antibiotics . These
days a number of antibiotics are being
produced from bacteria and fungi.
Streptomycin, tetracycline and
erythromycin are some of the
Rationalised-2023-24
MICROORGANISMS  : FRIEND AND FOE 21commonly known antibiotics which are
made from fungi and bacteria. The
antibiotics are manufactured by
growing specific microorganisms and
are used to cure a variety of diseases.
Antibiotics are even mixed with the
feed of livestock and poultry to check
microbial infection in animals. They are
also used to control many plant
diseases.
It is important to remember that
antibiotics should be taken only on
the advi ce of a qualified doctor . Also
you must complete  the course
prescribed by the doctor . If you take
antibiotics when not needed or in
wrong doses, it may make the drug
less effective when you might need
it in future. Also antibiotics taken
unnecessarily may kill the beneficial
bacteria in the body. Antibiotics,
however , are not ef fective against
cold and flu as these are caused by
viruses.
Vaccinefrom the disease-causing microbes for
ever. This is how a vaccine works.
Several diseases, including cholera,
tuberculosis, smallpox and hepatitis can
be prevented by vaccination.
Edward Jenner
discovered the
vaccine for small-
pox in 1798.
Why are children/infants
given vaccination?
When a disease-carrying microbe enters
our body, the body produces antibodies
to fight the invader . The body also
remembers how to fight the microbe if
it enters again. If dead or weakened
microbes are introduced in to a healthy
body , the body fights and kills
the invading bacteria  by producing
suitable antibodies. The antibodies
remain in the body and we are protected
In your childhood, you must have
been given injections to protect
yourself against several diseases.
Can you prepare a list of these
diseases? Y ou may take help fr om
your parents.
It is essential to protect all children
against these diseases. Necessary
vaccines are available in the nearby
hospitals. Y ou might have seen the
advertisement on TV and newspapers
regarding protection of children against
polio under the Pulse Polio Programme.
Polio drops given to children are
actually a vaccine.
A worldwide campaign against
smallpox has finally led to its eradication
from most parts of the world.
These days vaccines are made on a
large scale from microorganisms  to
protect humans and other animals from
several diseases.
Increasing Soil Fertility
Some bacteria  (Fig. 2.7) are able to fix
nitrogen from the atmosphere to enrich
soil with nitrogen and increase its
fertility. These microbes are commonly
called biological nitrogen fixers.
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 22Cleaning the Environment
Boojho and Paheli had observed the
school gardener making manure. Along
with their friends, they collected wastes
of plants, vegetables and fruit s from
nearby houses and  gardens. They put
them in a pit meant for waste disposal.
After some time , it decomposed and got
converted to manure. Boojho and
Paheli wanted to know how this had
happen ed.
Activity 2.5
Take two pots and fill each pot half
with soil. Mark them A and B. Put
plant waste in pot A and things like
polythene bags, empty glass bottles
and broken plastic toys in pot B.
Put the pots aside. Observe them
after 3-4 weeks.
Do you find any difference in the
contents of the two pots? If so, what is
the dif ference? Y ou will find that plant
waste  in pot A, has been decomposed.
How did this happen? The plant waste
has been converted into manure by the
action of microbes. The nutrientsreleased in the process can be used by
the plants again.
Did you notice that in pot B , the
polythene bags, empty glasses, bottles
and broken toy parts did not undergo
any such change? The microbes could
not ‘act’ on them and convert them into
manure.
You often see lar ge amounts of
dead organic matter in the form of
decaying plants and sometimes dead
animals on the gr ound. Y
ou find
that they disappear after some time.
This is because the microorganisms
decompose dead organic waste of plants
and animals converting them into
simple substances. These substances
are again used by other plants and
animals.  Thus, microorganisms can
be used to degrade the harmful and
smelly substances and thereby clean
up the environment.
2.4Harmful Microorganisms
Microorganisms are harmful in many
ways. Some of the microorganisms
cause diseases in human beings, plants
and animals. Such disease-causingFig. 2.7 :  The Nitrogen fixing cyanobacteria (blue green algae)
Rationalised-2023-24
MICROORGANISMS  : FRIEND AND FOE 23
microorganisms are called pathogens.
Some microorganisms spoil food,
clothing and leather . Let us study mor e
about their harmful activities.
Disease causing Microorganisms
in Humans
Pathogens enter our body through the
air we breathe, the water we drink or
the food we eat. They can also get
transmitted by direct contact with an
infected person or carried by an animal.
Microbial diseases that can spread from
an infected person to a healthy person
through air , water , food or physical
contact are called communicable
diseases . Examples of such diseases
include cholera, common cold, chicken
pox and tuberculosis.
When a person suffering from
common cold sneezes, fine droplets of
moisture carrying thousands of viruses
are spread in the air . The virus may enter
the body of a healthy person while
breathing and cause infection.There are some insects and animals
which act as carriers  of disease-
causing microbes. Housefly is one such
carrier . The flies sit on the garbage and
animal excreta. Pathogens stick to their
bodies. When these flies sit on uncovered
food they may transfer the pathogens.
Whoever eats the contaminated food is
likely to get sick. So, it is advisable to
always keep food covered. Avoid
consuming uncovered items of food.
Another example of a carrier is the
female Anopheles  mosquito (Fig. 2.8),
which carries the parasite of malaria
(Plasmodium). Female Aedes  mosquito
acts as carrier of dengue virus.
How can we control the spread of malaria
or dengue?
Then how do you
prevent the spread of
communicable
diseases?
 We should keep a
handkerchief on the
nose and mouth while
sneezing. It is better to
keep a distance from
infected persons.
Fig. 2.8 : Female Anopheles mosquito
Why does the teacher
keep telling us not
to let water collect
anywhere in the
neighbourhood?
All mosquitoes br eed in water . Hence,
one should not let water collect
anywhere, in coolers, tyres, flower pot,
etc. By keeping the surroundings clean
and dry we can prevent mosquitoes from
breeding. T ry to make a list of measur es
which help to avoid the spread of
malaria.
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 24
Some of the common diseases
affecting humans, their mode of
transmission and few general methods
of prevention are shown in Table 2.1.
Disease causing Microorganisms
in Animals
Several microorganisms not only cause
diseases in humans and plants, but alsoin other animals. For example, anthrax
is a dangerous human and cattle
disease caused by a bacterium. Foot
and mouth disease of cattle is caused
by a virus.
Disease causing Microorganisms
in Plants
Several microorganisms cause
diseases in plants like wheat,  rice, potato,
sugarcane, orange,  apple and others.
The diseases  reduce the yield of crops.
See Table 2.2 for some such plant
diseases. They can be controlled by theHuman Disease Causative Mode of Preventive Measures
Microorganism Transmission (General)
Tuberculosis Bacteria Air
Measles Virus Air
Chicken Pox Virus Air/Contact
Polio Virus Air/W ater
Cholera Bacteria Water/Food
Typhoid Bacteria Water
Hepatitis A Virus Water
Malaria Protozoa Mosquito
Robert Köch (1876)
discovered the bacterium
(Bacillus anthracis) which
causes anthrax disease.Keep the patient in complete
isolation. Keep the personal
belongings of the patient away
from those of the others.
Vaccination to be given at
suitable age.
Maintain personal hygiene
and good sanitary habits.
Consume properly cooked food
and boiled drinking water .
Vaccination.
Drink boiled drinking water .
Vaccination.
Use mosquito net and
repellents. Spray insecticides
and control breeding of
mosquitoes by not allowing
water to collect in the
surroundings.
Table 2.1: Some Common Human Diseases caused by Microorganisms
Rationalised-2023-24
MICROORGANISMS  : FRIEND AND FOE 25
use of certain chemicals which kill the
microbes.
Food Poisoning
Boojho was invited by his friend to a
party and he ate a variety of foodstuff.
On reaching home he started vomiting
and had to be taken to a hospital. The
doctor said that this condition could be
due to food poisoning.make the food poisonous causing
serious illness and even death. So, it
is very important that we preserve
food to prevent it from being spoilt.
2.5 Food Preservation
In Chapter 1, we have learnt about the
methods used to preserve and store food
grains. How do we preserve cooked  food
at home? Y ou know that br ead left
unused under moist conditions is
attacked by fungus. Microorganisms
spoil our food. Spoiled food emits bad
smell and has a bad taste and changed
colour . Is spoiling of food a chemical
reaction?
Paheli bought some mangoes but she
could not eat them for a few days. Later
she found that they were spoilt and
rotten. But she knows that the mango
pickle her grandmother makes does not
spoil for a long time. She is confused.Plant Micro- Mode of
Diseases organism Transmission
Citrus Bacteria Air
canker
Rust of Fungi Air,
wheat seeds
Yellow vein Virus Insect
mosaic of
bhindi  (Okra)
Paheli wonders how
food can become a
‘poison’.
Table 2.2: Some Common Plant Diseases caused by Microorganisms
Food poisoning could be due to the
consumption of food spoilt by some
microorganisms. Microorganisms
that grow on our food sometimes
produce toxic substances. These
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 26Let us study the common methods
of pr eserving food in our homes. W e
have to save it from the attack of
microorganisms.
Chemical Method
Salts and edible oils are the common
chemicals generally used to check the
growth of microorganisms. Therefore
they ar e called preservatives . We add
salt or acid preservatives to pickles to
prevent the attack of microbes. Sodium
benzoate and sodium metabisulphite are
common preservatives. These are also
used in jams and squashes to check
their spoilage .
Preservation by Common Salt
Common salt has been used to preserve
meat and fish for ages. Meat and fish
are covered with dry salt to check
the growth of bacteria. Salting is also
used to preserve amla
, raw mangoes,
tamarind, etc.
Preservation by Sugar
Jams, jellies and squashes are preserved
by sugar . Sugar r educes the moistur e
content which inhibits the growth of
bacteria which spoil food.
Preservation by Oil and Vinegar
Use of oil and vinegar prevents spoilage
of pickles because bacteria cannot live
in such an envir onment. V egetables,
fruits, fish and meat are often preserved
by this method.
Heat and Cold Treatments
You must have observed your mother
boiling milk before it is stored or used.
Boiling kills many microorganisms.Similarly, we keep our food in the
refrigerator . Low temperatur e inhibits
the growth of microbes.
Pasteurised milk can be consumed
without boiling as it is free from harmful
microbes. The milk is heated to about
700C for 15 to 30 seconds and then
suddenly chilled and stored. By doing
so, it prevents the growth of microbes.
This process was discovered by Louis
Pasteur . It is called pasteurisation .
Storage and Packing
These days dry fruits and even
vegetables are sold in sealed air tight
packets to prevent the attack of
microbes.
2.6Nitrogen Fixation
You have lear nt about the bacterium
Rhizobium   in Classes VI and VII. It is
involved in the  fixation of nitrogen in
leguminous plants (pulses). Recall that
Rhizobium  lives in the root nodules of
leguminous plants  (Fig. 2.9), such as
beans and peas, with which it has a
symbiotic relationship. Sometimes
nitrogen gets fixed through the action
of lightning. But you know that the
amount of nitrogen in the atmosphere
remains constant. Y ou may wonder
how? Let us understand this in the next
section.
Why does the milk that
comes in packets not spoil?
My mother told me that the
milk is ‘pasteurised’. What
is pasteurisation?
Rationalised-2023-24
MICROORGANISMS  : FRIEND AND FOE 27nitrogen cannot be taken directly by
plants and animals. Certain bacteria and
blue green algae  present in the soil fix
nitrogen from the atmosphere and
convert it into compounds of nitrogen.
Once nitrogen is converted into these
usable compounds, it can be utilised by
plants from the soil through their root
system. Nitrogen is then used for the
synthesis of plant proteins and other
compounds. Animals feeding on plants
get these proteins and other nitrogen
compounds (Fig. 2.10).
When plants and animals die,
bacteria and fungi present in the soil
convert the nitrogenous wastes into
nitrogenous compounds to be used by
plants again. Certain other bacteria
convert some part of them to nitrogen
gas which goes back into the
atmosphere. As a result, the percentage
of nitrogen in the atmosphere remains
more or less constant.
Fig. 2.10  : Nitrogen cycle
Fig. 2.9 : Roots of a leguminous plant with root
nodules
2.7 Nitrogen cycle
Our atmosphere has 78% nitrogen gas.
Nitrogen is one of the essential
constituents of all living organisms as
part of proteins, chlorophyll, nucleic
acids and vitamins. The atmospheric
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 28
 KEYWORDS KEYWORDS KEYWORDS KEYWORDS KEYWORDS
ALGAE
ANTIBIOTICS
ANTIBODIES
BACTERIA
CARRIER
COMMUNICABLE
DISEASES
FERMENT ATION
FUNGI
LACTOBACILLUS
MICROORGANISM
NITROGEN CYCLE
NITROGEN FIXA TION
PASTEURISA TION
PATHOGEN
PRESER VATION
PROTOZOA
RHIZOBIUM
VACCINE
VIRUS
YEAST WHA  WHA WHA  WHA WHA T YT YT Y T YT YOU HA OU HAOU HA OU HAOU HA VE LEARNTVE LEARNTVE LEARNTVE LEARNTVE LEARNT
/circlerightMicroorganisms are too small and are not
visible to the unaided eye.
/circlerightThey can live in all kinds of environment,
ranging from ice cold climate to hot springs
and deserts to marshy lands.
/circlerightMicroorganisms are found in air , water and
in the bodies of plants and animals.
/circlerightThey may be unicellular or multicellular .
/circlerightMicroorganisms include bacteria, fungi,
protozoa and some algae. Viruses, though
different from the above mentioned living
organisms, are considered microbes.
/circlerightViruses are quite different from other
microorganisms. They reproduce only inside
the host organism: bacterium, plant or ani-
mal cell.
/circlerightSome microorganisms are useful for
commercial production of medicines and
alcohol.
/circlerightSome microorganisms decompose the organic
waste and dead plants and animals into simple
substances and clean up the environment.
/circlerightProtozoans cause serious diseases like
dysentery and malaria.
/circlerightSome of the microorganisms grow on our food
and cause food poisoning.
/circlerightSome microorganisms reside in the root
nodules of leguminous plants. They can fix
nitrogen from air into soil and increase the
soil fertility.
/circlerightSome bacteria  present in the soil fix nitrogen
from the atmosphere and convert into
nitrogenous compounds.
/circlerightCertain bacteria convert compounds of nitro-
gen present in the soil into nitrogen gas which
is released to the atmosphere.
Rationalised-2023-24
MICROORGANISMS  : FRIEND AND FOE 29Exercises
1.Fill in the blanks.
(a)Microorganisms can be seen with the help of a ____________.
(b)Blue green algae fix __________ directly from air and enhance fertility
of soil.
(c)Alcohol is produced with the help of   __________.
(d)Cholera is caused by __________.
2.Tick the corr ect answer .
(a)Yeast is used in the pr oduction of
(i) sugar     (ii) alcohol     (iii) hydrochloric acid     (iv) oxygen
(b)The following is an antibiotic
(i) Sodium bicarbonate     (ii) Str eptomycin     (iii) Alcohol     (iv) Y east
(c)Carrier of malaria-causing protozoan is
(i)female Anopheles  mosquito (ii)cockroach
(iii)housefly (iv) butterfly
(d)The most common carrier of communicable diseases is
(i) ant    (ii) housefly    (iii) dragonfly    (iv) spider
(e)The bread or idli dough rises because of
(i) heat    (ii) grinding      (iii) growth of yeast cells  (iv) kneading
(f)The process of conversion of sugar into alcohol is called
(i)  nitrogen fixation  (ii) moulding  (iii) fermentation  (iv)  infection
3.Match the organisms in Column A with their action in
Column B.
A B
(i)Bacteria (a)Fixing nitrogen
(ii)Rhizobium (b)Setting of curd
(iii) Lactobacillus (c)Baking of bread
(iv)Yeast (d)Causing malaria
(v)A protozoan (e)Causing cholera
(vi)A virus (f)Causing AIDS
(g)Producing antibodies
4.Can microorganisms be seen with the naked eye? If not, how can they be
seen?
Rationalised-2023-24
SCIENCE 305.What are the major groups of microorganisms?
6.Name the microorganisms which can fix atmospheric nitrogen in the soil.
7.Write 10 lines on the usefulness of micr oorganisms in our lives.
8.Write a short paragraph on the har mful ef fects of micr oorganisms.
9.What are antibiotics? What precautions must be taken while taking
antibiotics?E X E R C I S E S
A BExtended Learning — Activities and Projects
1.Pull out a gram or bean plant fr om the field. Observe its r oots. Y ou
will find round structures called root nodules on the roots. Draw a
diagram of the root and show the root nodules.
2.Collect the labels fr om the bottles of jams and jellies. W rite down
the list of contents printed on the labels.
3.Visit a doctor . Find out why antibiotics should not be overused.
Prepare  a short report.
4.Project : Requir ements – 2 test tubes, marker pen, sugar , yeast
powder , 2 balloons and lime water .
Take two test tube s and mark  them  A and B. Clamp these tubes in
a stand and f ill the
m with water leaving some space at the top. Put
two spoonfuls of sugar in each
of the test tubes. Add a spoonful
of yeast in test tube B. Inflate the
two balloons incompletely . Now
tie the balloons on the mouth s
of each test tube. Keep them in
a warm place , away from
sunlight. W atch the setup  every
day for next 3-4 days. Record
your observations and think of
an explanation.
   Now take another test tube
filled 1/4 with lime water .
Remove the balloon from test
tube B in such a manner that
gas inside the balloon does not
escape. Fit the balloon on the
test tube and shake well.
Observe and explain.
Rationalised-2023-24
MICROORGANISMS  : FRIEND AND FOE 31Did Y ou Know?
Bacteria have lived on the earth for much longer than human beings.
They are such hardy organisms that they can live under extreme conditions.
They have been found living in boiling mudpots and extremly cold icy waters.
They have been found in lakes of caustic soda and in pools of concentrated
sulphuric acid. They can survive at depths of several kilometres. They
probably can survive in space, too. A kind of bacterium was recovered
from a camera which stood on the moon for two years.There is probably no
environment in which bacteria cannot survive.
Rationalised-2023-24
