SANKARA EYE HOSPITAL
PRE OPERATION INSTRUCTIONS FOR INPATIENTS

Dear Patient
We thank you for your trust in choosing Sankara Eye Hospital, for your surgical care. Please find some
instructions to help you and care giver plan your surgery better.
The following guidelines are recommended for patients who have not been given specific instructions.

Please bring the following with you as applicable:
Medical insurance card & policy information.
Prior approval or preauthorization form from your insurance company
Emergency Contact Information
List of medications (how much and when taken) & the medicines.
Primary care physician / referring physician : name and phone number

Information regarding attendants:
1. Arrange for someone to stay with you during the surgery. It is not advisable to drive back. Arrange to have a responsible driver, other than yourself, to drive you home when you are discharged from the hospital.
2. Only one attendant will be allowed with the patient. Children wouldn’t be allowed in patient ward.

Reporting on the day of surgery
3. Please ensure that ornaments are not worn on the day of surgery.
4. For infants and children below 3yrs, please ensure sufficient diapers are available.
5. Follow your doctor’s instructions regarding food, drink and medication on the day of surgery.
6. Your actual surgery would depend on the nature of the surgery and whether any pre medications are
needed. Children and those undergoing surgery under general anesthesia and emergencies get preference.
We will make every effort to keep you updated on your surgery time, however delays are sometimes unavoidable.
7. Discharge process will be completed in 3 – 4 hours time.

8. During this time, you may be asked the same questions repeatedly by different hospital personnel. Please be
patient and understand that this is done for your safety.
9. Hospital is not responsible for any of the personal belongings/valuables of the patients.
10. For the procedure/surgery, you may be required to share the room with another patient.

Instructions on food.
a. Have a light meal before coming for the surgery
b. Do not drink alcoholic beverages within 24 hours prior to your surgery.
c. Do not use tobacco 24 hours before your surgery, although it is suggested not to use tobacco 30
days before surgery.
d. If your surgery is planned under general anesthesia check with the attending staff / anesthetist on
when the last meal could be had.
Medications
1. Take your diabetes, blood pressure medication, heart medication, and seizure medication on the day of
your surgery as prescribed by your concerned physician.
2. Eye drops to be used as per instructions given by the Doctor.
3. Contact your doctor about taking your blood thinners such as Aspirin, Coumadin etc and instructions
regarding other medications and herbal medicine/supplements you take routinely. Check with your doctor
to see if he/she still wants you to take this medication.
Money Matters
2. Insurance patients have to pay Co-payment or deductible whichever is applicable and non-insurance patients have to pay the entire surgery cost before the surgery. This payment can be made by cash or credit card.
3. Do not bring large sums of money, jewelry and other valuables.
4. The charges explained to you is only estimation. The final amount payable would be explained to you
after the surgery is completed.
5. Any refunds if applicable would be based on the hospital rules and guidelines it may take up to 72 hours to effect.
If your child is unwell, the operation may need to be postponed. If they are unwell on the days leading up to
the operation consult your paediatrician who may prescribe some medication. If the guidelines above are not followed it is very important that you inform the ward staff and/ or anesthetist. Please clarify any doubts you may have regarding the surgery with your surgeon / patient care counselors.