SANKARA EYE HOSPITAL 
STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES

1. Objective
: To treat blindness due to cataract
2. Responsibility : Ophthalmologists
3. Indications : Any opacity in lens or its capsule affecting vision.
4. Contraindications : 1. The patient is medically unfit
2. The patient does not desire cataract surgery.
5. Pre-operative protocol The purpose of the pre-operative assessment is to- Confirm the diagnosis of visually significant cataract
- Ensure that the cataract is the cause of the visual symptoms
- Determine if there is co-existing ocular pathology
- Ensure the patient wishes to undergo surgery and understanding of specific risks, if any.
- Assess systemic problems and manage it.
HISTORY –
- A large number of patients who require cataract surgery have concomitant chronic
medical conditions that may affect the general condition, surgery or its outcome. Hence
relevant history pertaining to the medical fitness of the patient to withstand the surgical
stress, post-operative medication and general care should be recorded before surgery.
- Any known drug allergy.
This should also include:
General health evaluation including blood pressure check

ment of hearing and understanding of language
-operate with the procedure and lie reasonably flat during
surgery.

opportunity for patient to ask questions

EXAMINATION –
a. Visual acuity for both eyes, including projection of light for those with vision less than
3/60 with poor view of the fundus
b. Slit lamp examination for cataract grading, corneal details and fundus examination.
c. Intraocular pressure (IOP) (If done using a contact procedure, should be done one day prior to
surgery and not on the day of surgery)
d. Patency of lacrimal duct – including application of pressure over the sac region (ROPLAS) (If
sac syringing is done, should be done one day prior to surgery)
e. All patients are preferably seen by the operating surgeon. If is not feasible, the surgeon must
examine all one-eyed patients, all those with associated complications requiring deviation from
regular surgical technique, and all those posted for re-surgery.
f. Slit lamp examination to look for conjunctival congestion, discharge, cornea, AC depth, lens
opacity and phacodonesis.
g. Pupillary reaction to rule out posterior segment disorders
h. Posterior segment evaluation of both eyes, if the fundus can be visualized. Indirect
ophthalmoscopy is advised to examine patients with advanced cataracts.
i . Refraction of both eyes to cross check IOL power. If there is any mistake in biometry, this will
help.
Pre – operative counseling –
a. Explain about anesthesia, surgical procedure, the level of pain they may experience during
surgery specifically after draping the patient.
b. Explain possible conversion to routine ECCE/SICS with IOL in cases with small pupil, hard
lens or advanced cataract who have opted for phacoemulsification.
c. Explain the post-operative follow up and state the Do's and Don'ts in the immediate postoperative period. Group counseling might be appropriate and it is necessary to encourage
questions.
6. Pre-operative investigationsTests should only be considered when the history or a finding on physical examination would
have indicated the need for an investigation even if surgery had not been planned. Most
abnormalities that would be detected on special testing (e.g. ECG, CXR, FBC, clotting studies,
urea and electrolytes) can be predicted from taking a careful history and performing a physical
examination. Special tests do not reduce morbidity in this context and are not required unless
specifically indicated. For the patient with no history of significant systemic disease and no
2

abnormal findings on examination at the nurse-led assessment, no special investigations are
indicated. Any patient requiring special tests may need a medical opinion.
lowered immediately prior to surgery.
usual angina medication which should be available
in theatre.
Every effort should be made to make the experience as stress-free as possible. Generally patients
should not have surgery within three months of a myocardial infarct.
ould have their blood sugar controlled. If surgery is planned under LA
patients should have their usual medication and oral intake.
or a high flow oxygen enriched air system below the drapes.
heart disease.
ld have an INR prior to surgery.
Surgical Plan –
The doctor doing the pre-operative assessment should also formulate a surgical plan including
the following:
- Type of anaesthesia (Including need for stand by anesthetist)
- IOL type and power (order special lenses if required)
- Incision placement and astigmatism reduction procedures if appropriate
- Complexity of surgery e.g. small pupil, pseudoexfoliation, previous eye surgery, etc.
Biometry –
The following points should be noted when performing keratometry:
The keratometer should be calibrated ideally after 20 cases for single observer
- Calibration at 45 D / 7.5 mm Horizontal / Vertical
- Adjust eye piece to make mires coincide
- Always do Keratometry first before tonometry or any other corneal contact procedures.
Remeasure the corneal curvature of both eyes if:
-Corneal curvature is less than 40 D or more than 47 D
- The difference in corneal cylinder is more than 1 D between eyes
- The corneal cylinder correlates poorly with the refraction cylinder
7. Operating room protocol for cataract surgery –
- Check the emergency trolley medications (adrenaline, atropine, deriphylline,
dexamethasone, hydrocortisone, phenergan, mephentin, diazepam, oxygen cylinder with kit, I V
Kit, syringes, plaster, scissors, I V normal saline, Intubation kit, etc) as per the check list at least
twice a week.
- Check the case records to ensure patient identity. If there are two or more patients with the
same name, confirm the patients residential address, and relative's name and address.
- Confirm the eye to be operated
- The type of surgery to be performed
3

- Check the case record to see whether all investigations have been completed.
- Inform the surgeon about specific request by patients such as surgery by a particular surgeon
and specific clinical problem like pseudoexfoliation (PXF), phacodonesis, prior surgery,etc.
- Prioritize surgery for very old, medically challenged patients, one eyed patients, diabetics, etc
- Check IOL power and check whether the specific IOL is available.
The table/trolley should be thoroughly cleaned everyday with a wet towel and dried. Then it
should be cleaned with disinfectant solution. An autoclaved sterile towel should be placed over
the table before placing the required anesthetic solution, syringes, needles etc. Unsterile items
should not be put together with sterile items.
- Hygienic hand wash before each block should be done and surgical hand rub should be applied
on hand before giving the block.
- Wearing gloves after hand wash protects us from getting into problems. BUT for aseptic
purpose, we must not touch anywhere after hand wash and wearing gloves. If we do not want to
use gloves, at least a hygienic hand wash before giving block is required and person should not
touch anywhere else after the hand wash before giving the block.
- All the cotton and linen used in the block area should be pre sterilized and indicator strips to be
applied over them.
- Pulse Oxymeter can be used to monitor the patient while giving the block. More so if the
anaesthetist is not present.
- Only required medicines to be taken out on a day-to-day basis from the store.
- An emergency tray should be kept ready.
- Like needles, syringes also need to be changed for every patient.
- They should do cross check of pre-operative work up (confirm the case, eye to be
operated) before giving block.
- Following anesthesia, povidone iodine (5%) eye drops are instilled in the conjunctival sac.
8. General anaesthesia (GA) –
A general anaesthetic is not an exclusion to day case surgery and may be appropriate for patients
who:

safety might be compromised
ical condition severe enough to limit acceptable positioning
- the age below which the clinician or patient prefers GA will be influenced by
personal preference and the culture of both parties
lergy or other complication with LA.
Pre-operative fasting is necessary for general anaesthesia.
Local anaesthesia (LA)
With the advent of small incision techniques using phacoemulsification many surgeons find there
is no longer a need for complete akinesia, ocular hypotony or absence of lid movement and many
would regard the only goal of local anaesthesia to be pain-free surgery. This may be adequately
achieved by most local anaesthetic techniques including topical anaesthesia in many patients.
The main disadvantage of topical anaesthesia is the increased surgical difficulty in the absence of
akinesia, and the possible need to augment the anaesthesia in the event of intra-operative
complications.
4

The goals of LA for intraocular surgery are to:
ide pain-free surgery

All forms of cataract surgery with local anaesthesia demand significant patient co-operation
throughout the procedure. Co-operation is most important when procedures are performed with
topical (+/- intracameral) anaesthesia. Patients being operated upon by this technique should be
able to tolerate instruments
approaching the eye without anxiety or blepharospasm. This can be gauged pre-operatively. A
separate VIIth nerve block is not generally recommended.
Patients undergoing all forms of anaesthesia require adequate counselling and explanation of the
procedure. It is unnecessary to fast patients for local anaesthetic cataract surgery but they should
not have a full stomach immediately beforehand because of the risk of vomiting during the
procedure.

9. Technique
Although ocular perforation has been reported with an intended sub-Tenon’s anaesthetic (the
perforation occurred during the preparatory dissection in a patient with previous retinal
detachment surgery22), it is generally accepted that the risk of perforation is much lower for
blunt-cannula techniques than sharp needle LA techniques. It has also been proven in 2 recent
studies5, 11 that the risk of sight or life threatening complications was significantly increased
with sharp needle techniques.
Sharp needle length
Absolute distinction between peribulbar and retrobulbar injection cannot always be made, but
complications of both are reduced by using a short (25-31 mm) needle.23
Conclusions
For most patients the balance of risks and benefits favour avoiding sharp needle local
anaesthesia, especially in high myopes but systemic adverse events have been reported in all
forms of local anaesthesia including topical.10
Who Should Administer LA?
Sharp needle local anaesthetic injections should only be performed by anaesthetists or
ophthalmologists who have been trained appropriately in their use.
Nurses or technicians may be trained to administer topical, subconjunctival or su-Tenon’s
anaesthesia. It is not recommended that nurses or technicians administer peribulbar or
retrobulbar injections.
Methods of Monitoring
Continuous monitoring of ventilation and circulation is essential, both by clinical observations,
and by pulse oximetry. Monitoring should commence just prior to the administration of local
anaesthesia and continue until the surgical procedure is complete. The level of monitoring required during local anaesthesia will depend upon the anaesthetic technique and the medical
condition of the patient.
Monitoring should be the role of a member of staff who remains with the patient throughout the
monitoring period and whose sole responsibility is to the patient. This person must be trained to
detect and act on any adverse events.
All theatre personnel should have Basic Life Support (BLS) training, and there should always be
at least one person present who has Intermediate (ILS) or Advanced Life Support (ALS)
Training or an equivalent qualification.
Facilities
All intraocular surgery performed under LA should be carried out in a facility which is
appropriately equipped and staffed for resuscitation. Oxygen and suction must be available.
Patients should be on a tipping trolley or equivalent chair.
Recommending the type of anaesthesia
The surgical assessment should include recommendations on the type of anaesthetic indicated for
the individual patient. This will depend on psychological aspects of the patient and surgeon, the
particular features of the globe and orbit, and the anticipated difficulty of the surgery.
Sharp needle LA techniques have a higher risk of ocular and systemic complications, than subTenon’s or topical. LA techniques and should only be used when the anaesthetist and surgeon
consider it absolutely necessary.
Surgery Phacoemulsification is the preferred method of cataract surgery in the developed world but
extracapsular surgery is still occasionally necessary.
Cataract surgery should include:

the siting of the incision and consideration of limbal relaxing incisions if appropriate.
If patients are at increased risk of cystoid macular oedema (CME) (eg. diabetes, previous CME,
previous retinal vein occlusion, epi-retinal membrane and prostaglandin use), the use of a topical
non-steroidal medication before and
following surgery should be considered.
Procedure details :
Phacoemulsification – mm corneal or sclera tunnel is made and AC entered .Side entry is done
.Capsulorhexis done under viscoelastic visualization of capsule can be enhanced by usage of
dye( trypan blue).Hydroprocedures done and nucleus rotated .Nucleus emulsified by stop and
chop,divide and conquer or direct chop technique. Irrigation and aspiration of cortical matter
done .Foldable lens implanted under viscoelastic.AC was done .Intracameral Vigamox given and
anterior chamber formed with BSS.and subconjunctival Decadron can be given in special cases.
Topical antibiotic drops are instilled ( VIGAMOX). SICS with IOLConjunctival flap is made.5-6 mm sclera tunnel is made. Side port entry done and capsulorhexis
done. Dye can be used to stain the capsule for better visualisation.AC entry done and section
enlarged .Hydroprocedures done and nucleus prolapsed in AC .Nucleus delivered by phaco
sandwich or visco expression technique. Irrigation aspiration done .IOL implantation done under
viscoelastic.AC wash done and Intracameral Vigamox given and AC chamber formed with BSS.
Sub conjunctival Decadron can be given in special cases .Topical Vigamox is instilled.
10. Post-operative protocol for management of uncomplicated cases following cataract
surgery –
Following uneventful cataract surgery, the patients may be given oral Paracetamol 500 mg for
pain relief, repeated after 8 hours if needed.
The patient is examined the day following surgery. One should look for the following:
Anterior segment - Vision with and without pin hole
- Anterior segment of the eye
- Section - Apposition of Wound / Wound Leak / Gape
- Cornea - Epithelial Defect, Edema, SK
- A.C. - Hyphema, Hypopyon, Cortical Matter, Depth, Vitreous knuckle
- Iris - Iritis, Fibrinous reaction
- IOL - Centration and stability
- Pupil - Shape , Mobility, Vitreous
- PC - Opacity, Rent, Zonular dialysis Vitreous - Vitreous cells, Blood, Pigmentsl for
Fundus
- Red Glow
- Fundus examination (slit lamp/ Direct/ indirect)
- Specify the cause, if the visual acuity is poor (<6/18).
Post operative care –
The aim of postoperative examination is to look for complications and any early sign of
inflammation or infection.
Instilling eye drops –
Wash your hands with soap and water/ hand sanitizer can be used.. Allow it to dry.
- Open the dropper bottle without touching the tip.
- Ask the patient to raise the chin Hold the lower eye lid down with your finger tips.
- Gently put one drop of the drug into the lower fornix.
- Release the lower lid and ask the patient to close the eye gently.
- Close the dropper, don't leave it open.
- Wipe the drug on the cheek, don't rub the eye or wipe the lids.

Precautions Early resumption of routine activities is encouraged
- Normal diet is allowed from the day of surgery
- No head bath for 2 weeks , but head can be washed by extending the neck and ensuring that
water does not spill to the eye
- Avoid bathing in ponds or rivers for 3 months
- TV viewing and reading is allowed if the patient is comfortable
- Avoid driving two wheelers without protecting glasses
- Avoid lifting heavy weights for patients who undergone ECCE with sutures.…
- Dark glasses should be used for one month for outdoor activities
- Prostration or bending of head for saying prayers is permissible after 7 days
- After suture removal avoid pond or river baths for at least 1 week and instill topical antibiotics
6 times a day for a week.
Danger signs for which the patient is advised to report immediately - Redness
- Pain
- Sudden diminution of vision.
11. Prognosis : Excellent when performed with precautions and with proper post-operative care.
12. References :

1. www.rcophth.ac.uk/core/core_picker/download.asp?id=544
2. www.vision2020india.org/pdfs/cataract-manual-vision2020.pdf
3. www.eyesite.ca/resources/CPGs/COS_CataractCPGs_Oct08.pdf