CONSENT FOR CATARACT SURGERY WITH / WITHOUT IMPLANTATION OF INTRAOCULAR LENS
Name of patient:

MRN:

C/O

Age/Sex :

Date:
In giving permission for cataract extraction with / without implantation of an intraocular lens in my eye, I declare that I understand the
following information

1.

Alternative Treatments : In early cataract glasses can be used to improve vision. Currently there are no medicines or
devices that are an alternative. The only treatment for moderate to severe cataract or cataract affecting routine
activities is a surgery where the cataract is removed and then a vision is corrected.

2.

There are three methods of restoring vision after cataract surgery

a) Spectacles b) Contact Lens c) IOL implantation, which is usually carried out after removing the cataract in same sitting.
Spectacles increase image size by 30%. They cannot be used if there is cataract in only one eye (the other is normal) because they may
cause double vision. A contact lens increases image size by 8%. However, it is difficult to handle and may not be tolerated by everyone.
Intraocular lens does not increase image size. It is surgically placed inside the eye permanently

3.

An intraocular lens is implanted by surgery.. At the time of surgery the doctor may decide not to implant an intraocular lens in the
eye, if for any reason he feels that the lens implantation is not indicated or may prove deleterious to the well-being of the eye, even
though permission may have been given to do so.

4.

Though the intraocular implant power is calculated by utilizing a computerised Biometer (A-scan), a small correction in the
spectacles is to be considered inevitable postoperatively and this may be more in specific cases. Therefore, a small power is to be
expected in the spectacles for distance and near for clear vision after the operation.

5.

The quantum of vision obtained after a successful cataract surgery/lens implantation depends upon the retina behind. In an advanced
cataract even with the most sophisticated instruments (Ultrasound Scan etc.), it is not possible to be certain that the retina inside is
normal. If the retina is normal, you will see well, but it is not possible in a majority of advanced cataract cases to ascertain the
visual status of the retina before operation

6.

With modern instrumentation and micro surgical techniques, the rate of complications in cataract surgery with/without intraocular lens
implantation is very low. Complications can usually be managed by medical and/or surgical treatment. The chances of total loss of
vision are less than 0.5%.

7.

It is possible that vision may drop after surgery due to thickening/opacification of the posterior capsule. This is a sequelae to
extra Capsular Cataract Extraction. The condition is treated with the “Yag Laser”.

8.

Complications may include haemorrhage (bleeding), posterior capsule rupture, nucleus drop, vitreous loss, wound leakage, uveitis,
cornea decompensation, endophthalmitis, glaucoma, cystoid macular oedema or retinal detachment. In addition lens implantation
may be complicated by severe reaction to the lens or dislocation of the lens. The implanted lens may have to be repositioned or
removed surgically if it is likely to damage the eye.

9.

Though every effort is made to minimize the chances of infection, it cannot be eliminated altogether. Although you may have opted
for phacoemulsification surgery and the same may have been planned by your surgeon after pre-operative examination, if during
surgery phacoemulsification is found to be unsafe or not feasible., Your surgeon will have the liberty to perform surgery by the
conventional technique in the interest of patient safety.

10.

Complications of surgery in general :- As the procedure is generally done under local anaesthesia the risk to life is less than 0.5%. Risk
is greater in patients with Diabetes, Hypertension, Cardiac ailments and other systemic disorders & when surgery is performed under
general anaesthesia. There is a possibility of drug reaction, brain damage or risk to life.

11.

Some times in the best interest of the patient, the surgeon might defer implanting the IOL that has been promised
preoperatively, as this would give rise to unfavourable results and therefore surgeon may implant different IOL
depending on the intraoperative situation.
Since it is impossible to state every complication that may occur as a result of surgery, the list of complications in this form is not
exhaustive.
Consent for Operation :

1.

I hereby authorize Dr ......................................................................................... and those whom he may designate as associates or
assistants to perform cataract operation with an intraocular lens / without an intraocular lens / as a secondary procedure on my left / right
eye.
It has been explained to me that during the course of operation/ procedure, unforeseen conditions may be revealed or encountered
which necessitate surgical or other procedures in addition to or different from those contemplated. I, therefore, further request and
authorize the above named Physician/Surgeon or his designates to perform such additional surgical or other procedures as he or they deem necessary or desirable.

2.

The nature and purpose of the operation, the necessity thereof, the possible alternative methods of treatment of my condition have
been fully explained to me and I understand the same

3.

I am fully aware that the surgery is being performed in good faith and that no guarantee or assurance has been given as to the result that
may be obtained

4.

I consent to the administration of anesthesia and to the use of such anesthetics as may be deemed necessary or desirable

5.

I further consent to the administration of such drugs or infusions deemed necessary in the judgement of the medical staff

6.

I consent to the observing, photographing or televising of the procedure to be performed for medical, scientific or education
purpose provided my identity is not revealed by the pictures or by descriptive text accompanying them

7.

Any tissues or parts surgically removed may be disposed of by the institution in accordance with customary practice.
Informed Consent for Operation on Patients with Guarded / Poor Visual Prognosis
I have been explained by the attending surgeon/Designated Assistant prior to the operation that visual prognosis after
surgery is guarded/uncertain/poor/very poor. The reasons for this have been explained to me.
Trauma / Diabetic Retinopathy / Myopia / Glaucoma / Uveitis /Age Related Macular Degeneration / PVR / Complex Traction Retinal
Detachment / Combined tractional rhegmatogenous retinal detachment /Dislocated lens or IOL / Endophthalmitis (Severe eye
infection).
I the undersigned (the patient or nearest relative) hereby give my consent for the operation of left eye/right eye with
the full knowledge of possible complications and guarded/poor visual prognosis. I certify that I have read this informed
consent/it has been read over to me and explained to me in a language understood by me. All blanks or statements
requiring insertion or completion was filled in and inapplicable paragraphs were stricken off before I signed. The doctor
has answered all my questions to my satisfaction.
Name

Sign/left thumb impression

Time/Date

Patient :

Witness:
Relationship
patient

with

Declaration by Doctor :
I declare that I have explained the nature and consequences of the procedure to be performed and discussed the risks
that particularly concern patient.
I have given the patient an opportunity to ask questions and I have answered these.
Name
Doctor

Sign.

Time/Date